Preface 


NCE UPON A TIME, LONG, LONG AGO. IN A 

realm called the Midwestern United 
States—specifically the states of Minne¬ 
sota and Wisconsin—a group of friends 
gathered together to forever alter the 
history of gaming. 

It wasn’t their intent to do so. They were 
tired of merely reading tales about worlds of magic, 
monsters, and adventure. They wanted to play in those 
worlds, rather than observe them. That they went on 
to invent Dungeons & Dragons, and thereby ignite a 
revolution in gaming that continues to this day, speaks 
to two things. 

First, it speaks to their ingenuity and genius in fig¬ 
uring out that games were the perfect way to explore 
worlds that could not otherwise exist. Almost every 
modern game, whether played on a digital device or 
a tabletop, owes some debt to D&D. 

Second, it is a testament to the inherent appeal of the 
game they created. Dungeons & Dragons sparked a 
thriving global phenomenon. It is the first roleplaying 
game, and it remains one of the best of its breed. 

To play D&D, and to play it well, you don’t need to 
read all the rules, memorize every detail of the game, 
or master the fine art of rolling funny looking dice. 

None of those things have any bearing on what’s best 
about the game. 

What you need are two things, the first being friends 
with whom you can share the game. Playing games with 
your friends is a lot of fun, but D&D does something 
more than entertain. 

Playing D&D is an exercise in collaborative creation. 
You and your friends create epic stories filled with ten¬ 
sion and memorable drama. You create silly in-jokes 
that make you laugh years later. The dice will be cruel 
to you, but you will soldier on. Your collective creativ¬ 
ity will build stories that you will tell again and again, 
ranging from the utterly absurd to the stuff of legend. 

If you don’t have friends interested in playing, don’t 
worry. There’s a special alchemy that takes place 
around a D&D table that nothing else can match. Play 
the game with someone enough, and the two of you 


are likely to end up friends. It’s a cool side effect of the 
game. Your next gaming group is as close as the nearest 
game store, online forum, or gaming convention. 

The second thing you need is a lively imagination 
or, more importantly, the willingness to use whatever 
imagination you have. You don't need to be a master 
storyteller or a brilliant artist. You just need to aspire to 
create, to have the courage of someone who is willing to 
build something and share it with others. 

Luckily, just as D&D can strengthen your friendships, 
it can help build in you the confidence to create and 
share. D&D is a game that teaches you to look for the 
clever solution, share the sudden idea that can overcome 
a problem, and push yourself to imagine what could be, 
rather than simply accept what is. 

The first characters and adventures you create will 
probably be a collection of cliches. That’s true of every¬ 
one, from the greatest Dungeon Masters in history on 
down. Accept this reality and move on to create the 
second character or adventure, which will be better, 
and then the third, which will be better still. Repeat that 
over the course of time, and soon you'll be able to create 
anything, from a character’s background story to an epic 
world of fantasy adventure. 

Once you have that skill, it’s yours forever. Countless 
writers, artists, and other creators can trace their begin¬ 
nings to a few pages of D&D notes, a handful of dice, 
and a kitchen table. 

Above all else, D&D is yours. The friendships you 
make around the table will be unique to you. The adven¬ 
tures you embark on, the characters you create, the 
memories you make—these will be yours. D&D is your 
personal corner of the universe, a place where you have 
free reign to do as you wish. 

Go forth now. Read the rules of the game and the 
story of its worlds, but always remember that you are 
the one who brings them to life. They are nothing 
without the spark of life that you give them. 

Mike Mearls 
May 2014 









Introduction 

HE Dungeons & Dragons roleplaying 
game is about storytelling in worlds of 
swords and sorcery. It shares elements 
with childhood games of make-believe. Like 
those games, D&D is driven by imagina¬ 
tion. It’s about picturing the towering castle 
beneath the stormy night sky and imagining 
how a fantasy adventurer might react to the challenges 
that scene presents. 

Dungeon Master (DM): After passing through the 
craggy peaks, the road takes a sudden turn to the east 
and Castle Ravenloft towers before you. Crumbling 
towers of stone keep a silent watch over the approach. 
They look like abandoned guardhouses. Beyond these, 
a wide chasm gapes, disappearing into the deep 
fog below. A lowered drawbridge spans the chasm, 
leading to an arched entrance to the castle courtyard. 

The chains of the drawbridge creak in the wind, their 
rust-eaten iron straining with the weight. From atop 
the high strong walls, stone gargoyles stare at you 
from hollow sockets and grin hideously. A rotting 
wooden portcullis, green with growth, hangs in the 
entry tunnel. Beyond this, the main doors of Castle 
Ravenloft stand open, a rich warm light spilling into 
the courtyard. 

Phillip (playing Gareth): I want to look at the 
gargoyles. I have a feeling they’re not just statues. 

Amy (playing Riva): The drawbridge looks precarious? 

I want to see how sturdy it is. Do I think we can cross 
it, or is it going to collapse under our weight? 

Unlike a game of make-believe, D&D gives structure 
to the stories, a way of determining the consequences 
of the adventurers’ action. Players roll dice to resolve 
whether their attacks hit or miss or whether their adven¬ 
turers can scale a cliff, roll away from the strike of a 
magical lightning bolt, or pull off some other dangerous 
task. Anything is possible, but the dice make some out¬ 
comes more probable than others. 

Dungeon Master (DM): OK, one at a time. Phillip, 
you’re looking at the gargoyles? 

Phillip: Yeah. Is there any hint they might be 
creatures and not decorations? 

DM: Make an Intelligence check. 

Phillip: Does my Investigation skill apply? 

DM: Sure! 

Phillip (rolling a d20): Ugh. Seven. 

DM: They look like decorations to you. And Amy, 

Riva is checking out the drawbridge? 


In the Dungeons & Dragons game, each player 
creates an adventurer (also ealled a character) and 
teams up with other adventurers (played by friends). 
Working together, the group might explore a dark dun¬ 
geon, a ruined city, a haunted castle, a lost temple deep 
in a jungle, or a lava-filled cavern beneath a mysterious 
mountain. The adventurers can solve puzzles, talk with 
other characters, battle fantastic monsters, and discover 
fabulous magic items and other treasure. 

One player, however, takes on the role of the Dungeon 
Master (DM), the game’s lead storyteller and referee. 
The DM creates adventures for the characters, who nav¬ 
igate its hazards and decide which paths to explore. The 
DM might describe the entrance to Castle Ravenloft, 
and the players decide what they want their adventurers 
to do. Will they walk across the dangerously weathered 
drawbridge? Tie themselves together with rope to mini¬ 
mize the chance that someone will fall if the drawbridge 
gives way? Or cast a spell to carry them over the chasm? 

Then the DM determines the results of the adventur¬ 
ers’ actions and narrates what they experience. Because 
the DM can improvise to react to anything the players 
attempt, D&D is infinitely flexible, and each adventure 
can be exciting and unexpected. 

The game has no real end; when one story or quest 
wraps up, another one can begin, creating an ongoing 
story called a campaign. Many people who play the 
game keep their campaigns going for months or years, 
meeting with their friends every week or so to pick 
up the story where they left off. The adventurers grow 
in might as the campaign continues. Each monster 
defeated, each adventure completed, and each treasure 
recovered not only adds to the continuing story, but also 
earns the adventurers new capabilities. This increase 
in power is reflected by an adventurer’s level. 

There’s no winning and losing in the Dungeons & 
Dragons game—at least, not the way those terms are 
usually understood. Together, the DM and the players 
create an exciting story of bold adventurers who confront 
deadly perils. Sometimes an adventurer might come to 
a grisly end, torn apart by ferocious monsters or done in 
by a nefarious villain. Even so, the other adventurers can 
search for powerful magic to revive their fallen comrade, 
or the player might choose to create a new character to 
carry on. The group might fail to complete an adventure 
successfully, but if everyone had a good time and created 
a memorable story, they all win. 

Worlds of Adventure 

The many worlds of the Dungeons & Dragons game 
are places of magic and monsters, of brave warriors and 
spectacular adventures. They begin with a foundation 
of medieval fantasy and then add the creatures, places, 
and magic that make these worlds unique. 

The worlds of the Dungeons & Dragons game exist 
within a vast cosmos called the multiverse, connected 
in strange and mysterious ways to one another and to 
other planes of existence, such as the Elemental Plane 
of Fire and the Infinite Depths of the Abyss. Within 






this multiverse are an endless variety of worlds. Many 
of them have been published as official settings for the 
D&D game. The legends of the Forgotten Realms, Drag- 
onlance, Greyhawk, Dark Sun, Mystara, and Eberron 
settings are woven together in the fabric of the multi- 
verse. Alongside these worlds are hundreds of thousands 
more, created by generations of D&D players for their 
own games. And amid all the richness of the multiverse, 
you might create a world of your own. 

All these worlds share characteristics, but each world 
is set apart by its own history and cultures, distinctive 
monsters and races, fantastic geography, ancient dun¬ 
geons, and scheming villains. Some races have unusual 
traits in different worlds. The halflings of the Dark Sun 
setting, for example, are jungle-dwelling cannibals, 
and the elves are desert nomads. Some worlds feature 
races unknown in other settings, such as Eberron’s war- 
forged, soldiers created and imbued with life to fight in 
the Last War. Some worlds are dominated by one great 
story, like the War of the Lance that plays a central role 
in the Dragonlance setting. But they’re all D&D worlds, 
and you can use the rules in this book to create a char¬ 
acter and play in any one of them. 

Your DM might set the campaign on one of these 
worlds or on one that he or she created. Because there 
is so much diversity among the worlds of D&D, you 
should check with your DM about any house rules that 
will affect your play of the game. Ultimately, the Dun¬ 
geon Master is the authority on the campaign and its 
setting, even if the setting is a published world. 

Using This Book 

The Player’s Handbook is divided into three parts. 

Part 1 is about creating a character, providing the 
rules and guidance you need to make the character 
you’ll play in the game. It includes information on the 
various races, classes, backgrounds, equipment, and 
other customization options that you can choose from. 
Many of the rules in part 1 rely on material in parts 2 
and 3. If you come across a game concept in part 1 that 
you don’t understand, consult the book’s index. 

Part 2 details the rules of how to play the game, 
beyond the basics described in this introduction. That 
part covers the kinds of die rolls you make to determine 
success or failure at the tasks your character attempts, 
and describes the three broad categories of activity in 
the game; exploration, interaction, and combat. 

Part 3 is all about magic. It covers the nature of magic 
in the worlds of D&D, the rules for spellcasting, and the 
huge variety of spells available to magic-using charac¬ 
ters (and monsters) in the game. 

How TO Play 

The play of the Dungeons & Dragons game unfolds 
according to this basic pattern. 

1. The DM describes the environment. The DM 
tells the players where their adventurers are and what’s 
around them, presenting the basic scope of options that 
present themselves (how many doors lead out of a room, 
what’s on a table, who’s in the tavern, and so on). 


2. The players describe what they want to do. Some¬ 
times one player speaks for the whole party, saying, 
“We’ll take the east door,” for example. Other times, 
different adventurers do different things; one adventurer 
might search a treasure chest while a second examines 
an esoteric symbol engraved on a wall and a third keeps 
watch for monsters. The players don’t need to take 
turns, but the DM listens to every player and decides 
how to resolve those actions. 

Sometimes, resolving a task is easy. If an adventurer 
wants to walk across a room and open a door, the DM 
might just say that the door opens and describe what 
lies beyond. But the door might be locked, the floor 
might hide a deadly trap, or some other circumstance 
might make it challenging for an adventurer to complete 
a task. In those cases, the DM decides what happens, 
often relying on the roll of a die to determine the results 
of an action. 

3. The DM narrates the results of the adventurers’ 
actions. Describing the results often leads to another 
decision point, which brings the flow of the game right 
back to step 1. 

This pattern holds whether the adventurers are cau¬ 
tiously exploring a ruin, talking to a devious prince, or 
locked in mortal combat against a mighty dragon. In 
certain situations, particularly combat, the action is 
more structured and the players (and DM) do take turns 
choosing and resolving actions. But most of the time, 
play is fluid and flexible, adapting to the circumstances 
of the adventure. 

Often the action of an adventure takes place in the 
imagination of the players and DM, relying on the DM’s 
verbal descriptions to set the scene. Some DMs like to 
use music, art, or recorded sound effects to help set the 
mood, and many players and DMs alike adopt different 
voices for the various adventurers, monsters, and other 
characters they play in the game. Sometimes, a DM 
might lay out a map and use tokens or miniature figures 
to represent each creature involved in a scene to help 
the players keep track of where everyone is. 

Game Dice 

The game uses polyhedral dice with different numbers 
of sides. You can find dice like these in game stores and 
in many bookstores. 

In these rules, the different dice are referred to by the 
letter d followed by the number of sides; d4, d6, d8, dlO, 
dl2, and d20. For instance, a d6 is a six-sided die (the 
typical cube that many games use). 

Percentile dice, or dlOO, work a little differently. You 
generate a number between 1 and 100 by rolling two 
different ten-sided dice numbered from 0 to 9. One die 
(designated before you roll) gives the tens digit, and 
the other gives the ones digit. If you roll a 7 and a 1, for 
example, the number rolled is 71. Two Os represent 100. 
Some ten-sided dice are numbered in tens (00, 10, 20, 
and so on), making it easier to distinguish the tens digit 
from the ones digit. In this case, a roll of 70 and 1 is 71, 
and 00 and 0 is 100. 

When you need to roll dice, the rules tell you how 
many dice to roll of a certain type, as well as what mod¬ 
ifiers to add. For example, “3d8 + 5” means you roll 








three eight-sided dice, add them together, and add 5 
to the total. 

The same d notation appears in the expressions “ld3” 
and “ld2.” To simulate the roll of ld3, roll a d6 and 
divide the number rolled by 2 (round up). To simulate 
the roll of ld2, roll any die and assign a 1 or 2 to the roll 
depending on whether it was odd or even. (Alternatively, 
if the number rolled is more than half the number of 
sides on the die, it’s a 2.) 

The D20 

Does an adventurer’s sword swing hurt a dragon or just 
bounce off its iron-hard scales? Will the ogre believe an 
outrageous bluff? Can a character swim across a raging 
river? Can a character avoid the main blast of a fireball, 
or does he or she take full damage from the blaze? In 
cases where the outcome of an action is uncertain, 
the Dungeons & Dragons game relies on rolls of a 
20-sided die, a d20, to determine success or failure. 

Every character and monster in the game has capa¬ 
bilities defined by six ability scores. The abilities are 
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, 
and Charisma, and they typically range from 3 to 18 
for most adventurers. (Monsters might have scores as 
low as 1 or as high as 30.) These ability scores, and the 
ability modifiers derived from them, are the basis for 
almost every d20 roll that a player makes on a charac¬ 
ter’s or monster’s behalf. 

Ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws are the 
three main kinds of d20 rolls, forming the core of the 
rules of the game. All three follow these simple steps. 

1. Roll the die and add a modifier. Roll a d20 and 
add the relevant modifier. This is typically the mod¬ 
ifier derived from one of the six ability scores, and it 
sometimes includes a proficiency bonus to reflect a char¬ 
acter’s particular skill. (See chapter 1 for details on each 
ability and how to determine an ability’s modifier.) 

2. Apply circumstantial bonuses and penalties. A 
class feature, a spell, a particular circumstance, or some 
other effect might give a bonus or penalty to the check. 



3. Compare the total to a target number. If the total 
equals or exceeds the target number, the ability check, 
attack roll, or saving throw is a success. Otherwise, it’s 
a failure. The DM is usually the one who determines 
target numbers and tells players whether their ability 
checks, attack rolls, and saving throws succeed or fail. 

The target number for an ability check or a saving 
throw is called a Difficulty Class (DC). The target 
number for an attack roll is called an Armor Class (AC). 

This simple rule governs the resolution of most tasks 
in D&D play. Chapter 7 provides more detailed rules for 
using the d20 in the game. 

Advantage and Disadvantage 

Sometimes an ability check, attack roll, or saving throw 
is modified by special situations called advantage and 
disadvantage. Advantage reflects the positive circum¬ 
stances surrounding a d20 roll, while disadvantage 
reflects the opposite. When you have either advantage or 
disadvantage, you roll a second d20 when you make the 
roll. Use the higher of the two rolls if you have advan¬ 
tage, and use the lower roll if you have disadvantage. 

For example, if you have disadvantage and roll a 17 and 
a 5, you use the 5. If you instead have advantage and roll 
those numbers, you use the 17. 

More detailed rules for advantage and disadvantage 
are presented in chapter 7. 

Specific Beats General 

This book contains rules, especially in parts 2 and 3, 
that govern how the game plays. That said, many racial 
traits, class features, spells, magic items, monster abili¬ 
ties, and other game elements break the general rules in 
some way, creating an exception to how the rest of the 
game works. Remember this: If a specific rule contra¬ 
dicts a general rule, the specific rule wins. 

Exceptions to the rules are often minor. For instance, 
many adventurers don’t have proficiency with longbows, 
but every wood elf does because of a racial trait. That 
trait creates a minor exception in the game. Other 
examples of rule-breaking are more conspicuous. For 
instance, an adventurer can’t normally pass through 
walls, but some spells make that possible. Magic 
accounts for most of the major exceptions to the rules. 

Round Down 

There’s one more general rule you need to know at the 
outset. Whenever you divide a number in the game, 
round down if you end up with a fraction, even if the 
fraction is one-half or greater. 

Adventures 

The Dungeons & Dragons game consists of a group 
of characters embarking on an adventure that the Dun¬ 
geon Master presents to them. Each character brings 
particular capabilities to the adventure in the form of 
ability scores and skills, class features, racial traits, 
equipment, and magic items. Every character is dif¬ 
ferent, with various strengths and weaknesses, so the 
best party of adventurers is one in which the characters 
complement each other and cover the weaknesses of 




their companions. The adventurers must cooperate to 
successfully complete the adventure. 

The adventure is the heart of the game, a story with 
a beginning, a middle, and an end. An adventure might 
be created by the Dungeon Master or purchased off the 
shelf, tweaked and modified to suit the DM’s needs and 
desires. In either case, an adventure features a fantastic 
setting, whether it’s an underground dungeon, a crum¬ 
bling castle, a stretch of wilderness, or a bustling city. 

It features a rich cast of characters: the adventurers 
created and played by the other players at the table, 
as well as nonplayer characters (NPCs). Those char¬ 
acters might be patrons, allies, enemies, hirelings, or 
just background extras in an adventure. Often, one of 
the NPCs is a villain whose agenda drives much of an 
adventure’s action. 

Over the course of their adventures, the characters 
are confronted by a variety of creatures, objects, and 
situations that they must deal with in some way. Some¬ 
times the adventurers and other creatures do their 
best to kill or capture each other in combat. At other 
times, the adventurers talk to another creature (or even 
a magical object) with a goal in mind. And often, the 
adventurers spend time trying to solve a puzzle, bypass 
an obstacle, find something hidden, or unravel the cur¬ 
rent situation. Meanwhile, the adventurers explore the 
world, making decisions about which way to travel and 
what they’ll try to do next. 

Adventures vary in length and complexity. A short 
adventure might present only a few challenges, and 
it might take no more than a single game session to 
complete. A long adventure can involve hundreds of 
combats, interactions, and other challenges, and take 
dozens of sessions to play through, stretching over 
weeks or months of real time. Usually, the end of an 
adventure is marked by the adventurers heading back to 
civilization to rest and enjoy the spoils of their labors. 

But that’s not the end of the story. You can think of 
an adventure as a single episode of a TV series, made 
up of multiple exciting scenes. A campaign is the whole 
series—a string of adventures joined together, with a 
consistent group of adventurers following the narrative 
from start to finish. 

The Three Pillars of Adventure 

Adventurers can try to do anything their players can 
imagine, but it can be helpful to talk about their activ¬ 
ities in three broad categories: exploration, social 
interaction, and combat. 

Exploration includes both the adventurers’ movement 
through the world and their interaction with objects and 
situations that require their attention. Exploration is the 
give-and-take of the players describing what they want 
their characters to do, and the Dungeon Master telling 
the players what happens as a result. On a large scale, 
that might involve the characters spending a day cross¬ 
ing a rolling plain or an hour making their way through 
caverns underground. On the smallest scale, it could 
mean one character pulling a lever in a dungeon room to 
see what happens. 

Social interaction features the adventurers talking to 
someone (or something) else. It might mean demanding 


that a captured scout reveal the secret entrance to the 
goblin lair, getting information from a rescued prisoner, 
pleading for mercy from an ore chieftain, or persuading 
a talkative magic mirror to show a distant location to 
the adventurers. 

The rules in chapters 7 and 8 support exploration and 
social interaction, as do many class features in chapter 3 
and personality traits in chapter 4. 

Combat, the focus of chapter 9, involves characters 
and other creatures swinging weapons, casting spells, 
maneuvering for position, and so on—all in an effort 
to defeat their opponents, whether that means killing 
every enemy, taking captives, or forcing a rout. Combat 
is the most structured element of a D&D session, with 
creatures taking turns to make sure that everyone gets 
a chance to act. Even in the context of a pitched battle, 
there’s still plenty of opportunity for adventurers to 
attempt wacky stunts like surfing down a flight of stairs 
on a shield, to examine the environment (perhaps by 
pulling a mysterious lever), and to interact with other 
creatures, including allies, enemies, and neutral parties. 

The Wonders of Magic 

Few D&D adventures end without something magical 
happening. Whether helpful or harmful, magic appears 
frequently in the life of an adventurer, and it is the focus 
of chapters 10 and 11. 

In the worlds of Dungeons & Dragons, practitioners 
of magic are rare, set apart from the masses of people 
by their extraordinary talent. Common folk might see 
evidence of magic on a regular basis, but it’s usually 
minor—a fantastic monster, a visibly answered prayer, 
a wizard walking through the streets with an animated 
shield guardian as a bodyguard. 

For adventurers, though, magic is key to their sur¬ 
vival. Without the healing magic of clerics and paladins, 
adventurers would quickly succumb to their wounds. 
Without the uplifting magical support of bards and 
clerics, warriors might be overwhelmed by powerful 
foes. Without the sheer magical power and versatility 
of wizards and druids, every threat would be mag¬ 
nified tenfold. 

Magic is also a favored tool of villains. Many adven¬ 
tures are driven by the machinations of spellcasters 
who are hellbent on using magic for some ill end. A cult 
leader seeks to awaken a god who slumbers beneath 
the sea, a hag kidnaps youths to magically drain them 
of their vigor, a mad wizard labors to invest an army of 
automatons with a facsimile of life, a dragon begins a 
mystical ritual to rise up as a god of destruction—these 
are just a few of the magical threats that adventurers 
might face. With magic of their own, in the form of 
spells and magic items, the adventurers might prevail! 









Chapter 1: Step-by-Step Characters 


OUR FIRST STEP IN PLAYING AN ADVENTURER IN THE 

Dungeons & Dragons game is to imagine 
and create a character of your own. Your 
character is a combination of game statistics, 
roleplaying hooks, and your imagination. You 
choose a race (such as human or halfling) and 
a class (such as fighter or wizard). You also 
invent the personality, appearance, and backstory of 
your character. Once completed, your character serves 
as your representative in the game, your avatar in the 
Dungeons & Dragons world. 

Before you dive into step 1 below, think about the 
kind of adventurer you want to play. You might be a 
courageous fighter, a skulking rogue, a fervent cleric, or 
a flamboyant wizard. Or you might be more interested 
in an unconventional character, such as a brawny rogue 
who likes hand-to-hand combat, or a sharpshooter who 
picks off enemies from afar. Do you like fantasy fiction 
featuring dwarves or elves? Try building a character of 
one of those races. Do you want your character to be the 
toughest adventurer at the table? Consider a class like 
barbarian or paladin. If you don’t know where else to 
begin, take a look at the illustrations in this book to see 
what catches your interest. 

Once you have a character in mind, follow these steps 
in order, making decisions that reflect the character you 
want. Your conception of your character might evolve 
with each choice you make. What’s important is that you 
come to the table with a character you’re excited to play. 

Throughout this chapter, we use the term character 
sheet to mean whatever you use to track your character, 
whether it’s a formal character sheet (like the one at the 
end of this book), some form of digital record, or a piece 
of notebook paper. An official D&D character sheet is a 
fine place to start until you know what information you 
need and how you use it during the game. 

Building Bruenor 

Each step of character creation includes an example of 
that step, with a player named Bob building his dwarf 
character, Bruenor. 

1. Choose a Race 

Every character belongs to a race, one of the many 
intelligent humanoid species in the D&D world. The 
most common player character races are dwarves, elves, 
halflings, and humans. Some races also have subraces, 
such as mountain dwarf or wood elf. Chapter 2 provides 
more information about these races, as well as the less 
widespread races of dragonborn, gnomes, half-elves, 
half-ores, and tieflings. 

The race you choose contributes to your character’s 
identity in an important way, by establishing a general 
appearance and the natural talents gained from culture 
and ancestry. Your character’s race grants particular 
racial traits, such as special senses, proficiency with 
certain weapons or tools, proficiency in one or more 
skills, or the ability to use minor spells. These traits 
sometimes dovetail with the capabilities of certain 


classes (see step 2). For example, the racial traits of 
lightfoot halflings make them exceptional rogues, and 
high elves tend to be powerful wizards. Sometimes 
playing against type can be fun, too. Half-ore paladins 
and mountain dwarf wizards, for example, can be 
unusual but memorable characters. 

Your race also increases one or more of your ability 
scores, which you determine in step 3. Note these 
increases and remember to apply them later. 

Record the traits granted by your race on your 
character sheet. Be sure to note your starting 
languages and your base speed as well. 

Building Bruenor, Step 1 

Bob is sitting down to create his character. He decides 
that a gruff mountain dwarf fits the character he wants 
to play. He notes all the racial traits of dwarves on his 
character sheet, including his speed of 25 feet and the 
languages he knows: Common and Dwarvish. 

2. Choose a Class 

Every adventurer is a member of a class. Class broadly 
describes a character’s vocation, what special talents he 
or she possesses, and the tactics he or she is most likely 
to employ when exploring a dungeon, fighting monsters, 
or engaging in a tense negotiation. The character 
classes are described in chapter 3. 

Your character receives a number of benefits from 
your choice of class. Many of these benefits are class 
features— capabilities (including spellcasting) that set 
your character apart from members of other classes. 

You also gain a number of proficiencies: armor, 
weapons, skills, saving throws, and sometimes tools. 
Your proficiencies define many of the things your 
character can do particularly well, from using certain 
weapons to telling a convincing lie. 

On your character sheet, record all the features that 
your class gives you at 1st level. 

Level 

Typically, a character start- at 1st level and advances 
in level by adventuring and gaining experience points 
(XP). A Ist-level character is inexperienced in the 
adventuring world, although he or she might have been 
a soldier or a pirate and done dangerous things before. 

Starting off at 1st level marks your character’s entry 
into the adventuring life. If you’re already familiar 
with the game, or if you are joining an existing D&D 
campaign, your DM might decide to have you begin at a 
higher level, on the assumption that your character has 
already survived a few harrowing adventures. 

^ 

Quick Build 

Each class description in chapter 3 includes a section 
offering suggestions to quickly build a character of that 
class, including how to assign your highest ability scores, 
a background suitable to the class, and starting spells. 

.--- . ''-W 



:‘Tt-!’ ult ARACTERS 


l' 5.R-n i STEI' BY 




Record your level on your character sheet. If you’re 
starting at a higher level, record the additional elements 
your class gives you for your levels past 1st. Also record 
your experience points. A Ist-level character has 0 
XR A higher-level character typically begins with the 
minimum amount of XP required to reach that level 
(see “Beyond 1st Level” later in this chapter). 

Hit Points and Hit Dice 

Your character’s hit points define how tough your 
character is in combat and other dangerous situations. 
Your hit points are determined by your Hit Dice (short 
for Hit Point Dice). 

Ability Score Summary 
strength 

Measures: Natural athleticism, bodily power 
Important for: Barbarian, fighter, paladin 
Racial Increases: 

Mountain dwarf (+2) Half-ore (+2) 

Dragonborn (-1-2) Human (-i-l) 

Dexterity 

Measures: Physical agility, reflexes, balance, poise 
Important for: Monk, ranger, rogue 
Racial Increases: 

Elf {■t2) Forest gnome (-t-1) 

Halfling (-^2) Human (-i-l) 

Constitution 

Measures: Health, stamina, vital force 
Important for: Everyone 
Racial Increases: 

Dwarf (4-2) Half-ore (4-1) 

Stout halfling (4-I) Human {4-I) 

Rock gnome (4-I) 

Intelligence 

Measures: Mental acuity, information recall, analytical skill 
Important for: Wizard 
Racial Increases: 

High elf ( 4 -I) Tiefling (4-1) 

Gnome (4-2) Human ( 4 -I) 

Wisdom 

Measures: Awareness, intuition, insight 
Important for: Cleric, druid 
Racial Increases: 

Hill dwarf (4-I) Human (4-I) 

Wood elf (4-I) 

Charisma 

Measures: Confidence, eloquence, leadership 
Important for: Bard, sorcerer, warlock 
Racial Increases: 

Half-elf (4-2) Dragonborn ( 4 -I) 

Drow ( 4 -I) Human ( 4 -I) 

Lightfoot halfling ( 4 -I) Tiefling (4-2) 


At 1st level, your character has 1 Hit Die, and the 
die type is determined by your class. You start with hit 
points equal to the highest roll of that die, as indicated in 
your class description. (You also add your Constitution 
modifier, which you’ll determine in step 3.) This is also 
your hit point maximum. 

Record your character’s hit points on your character 
sheet. Also record the type of Hit Die your character 
uses and the number of Hit Dice you have. After you 
rest, you ean spend Hit Dice to regain hit points (see 
“Resting” in chapter 8). 

Proficiency Bonus 

The table that appears in your class description shows 
your proficiency bonus, which is +2 for a Ist-level 
character. Your proficiency bonus applies to many of the 
numbers you’ll be recording on your character sheet: 

• Attack rolls using weapons you’re proficient with 

• Attack rolls with spells you cast 

• Ability checks using skills you’re proficient in 

• Ability checks using tools you’re profieient with 

• Saving throws you’re proficient in 

• Saving throw DCs for spells you cast (explained in 
each spellcasting class) 

Your class determines your weapon proficiencies, 
your saving throw proficiencies, and some of your skill 
and tool proficiencies. (Skills are described in chapter 7, 
tools in chapter 5.) Your background gives you additional 
skill and tool proficiencies, and some races give 
you more proficiencies. Be sure to note all of these 
proficiencies, as well as your proficiency bonus, on your 
character sheet. 

Your proficiency bonus can’t be added to a single die 
roll or other number more than once. Occasionally, your 
proficiency bonus might be modified (doubled or halved, 
for example) before you apply it. If a circumstance 
suggests that your proficiency bonus applies more than 
once to the same roll or that it should be multiplied 
more than once, you nevertheless add it only once, 
multiply it only once, and halve it only once. 

Building Bruenor, Step 2 

Bob imagines Bruenor charging into battle with an axe, 
one horn on his helmet broken off. He makes Bruenor a 
fighter and notes the fighter’s proficiencies and Ist-level 
class features on his character sheet. 

As a Ist-level fighter, Bruenor has 1 Hit Die—a dlO— 
and starts with hit points equal to 10 + his Constitution 
modifier. Bob notes this, and will record the final 
number after he determines Bruenor’s Constitution 
score (see step 3). Bob also notes the proficiency bonus 
for a Ist-level character, which is +2. 

3. Determine Ability Scores 

Much of what your character does in the game depends 
on his or her six abilities: Strength, Dexterity, 
Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. 

Each ability has a score, which is a number you record 
on your character sheet. 

The six abilities and their use in the game are 
described in chapter 7. The Ability Score Summary 



table provides a quick reference for what qualities 
are measured by each ability, what races increases 
which abilities, and what classes consider each ability 
particularly important. 

You generate your character's six ability scores 
randomly. Roll four 6-sided dice and record the total of 
the highest three dice on a piece of scratch paper. Do 
this five more times, so that you have six numbers. If 
you want to save time or don’t like the idea of randomly 
determining ability scores, you can use the following 
scores instead: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8. 

Now take your six numbers and write each number 
beside one of your character’s six abilities to assign 
scores to Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, 
Wisdom, and Charisma. Afterward, make any changes 
to your ability scores as a result of your race choice. 

After assigning your ability scores, determine 
your ability modifiers using the Ability Scores and 
Modifiers table. To determine an ability modifier without 
consulting the table, subtract 10 from the ability score 
and then divide the result by 2 (round down). Write the 
modifier next to each of your scores. 

Building Bruenor, Step 3 

Bob decides to use the standard set of scores (15, 14, 

13, 12, 10, 8) for Bruenor's abilities. Since he’s a fighter, 
he puts his highest score, 15, in Strength. His next- 
highest, 14, goes in Constitution. Bruenor might be a 
brash fighter, but Bob decides he wants the dwarf to 
be older, wiser, and a good leader, so he puts decent 
scores in Wisdom and Charisma. After applying his 
racial benefits (increasing Bruenor's Constitution by 
2 and his Strength by 2), Bruenor’s ability scores and 


Ability Scores and Modifiers 


Score 

Modifier 

Score 

Modifier 

I 

-5 

16-17 

-1-3 

2-3 

-4 

18-19 

+4 

4-5 

-3 

20-21 

+5 

6-7 

-2 

22-23 

+6 

8-9 

-1 

24-25 

+7 

10 -n 

-^0 

26-27 

+8 

12-13 

4-1 

28-29 

4-9 

14-15 

+2 

30 

4-10 


average and nearly equal (13, 13, 13, 12, 12, 12), or any 
set of numbers between those extremes. 

4, Describe Your Character 

Once you know the basic game aspects of your 
character, it’s time to flesh him or her out as a person. 
Your character needs a name. Spend a few minutes 
thinking about what he or she looks like and how he or 
she behaves in general terms. 

Using the information in chapter 4, you can flesh out 
your character’s physical appearance and personality 
traits. Choose your character’s alignment (the moral 
compass that guides his or her decisions) and ideals. 
Chapter 4 also helps you identify the things your 
character holds most dear, called bonds, and the flaws 
that could one day undermine him or her. 

Your character’s background describes where he or 
she came from, his or her original occupation, and the 
character’s place in the D&D world. Your DM might 
offer additional backgrounds beyond the ones included 



modifiers look like this: Strength 17 (-i-3), Dexterity 10 
(+0), Constitution 16 (+3), Intelligence 8 (-1), Wisdom 13 
(-1-1), Charisma 12 (+1). 

Bob fills in Bruenor's final hit points: 10 + his 
Constitution modifier of +3, for a total of 13 hit points. 


Variant: Customizing Ability Scores 

At your Dungeon Master’s option, you can use this 
variant for determining your ability scores. The method 
described here allows you to build a character with a set 
of ability scores you choose individually. 

You have 27 points to spend on your ability scores. 
The cost of each score is shown on the Ability Score 
Point Cost table. For example, a score of 14 costs 7 
points. Using this method, 15 is the highest ability score 
you can end up with, before applying racial increases. 
You can’t have a score lower than 8. 

This method of determining ability scores enables 
you to create a set of three high numbers and three low 
ones (15, 15, 15, 8, 8, 8), a set of numbers that are above 


Ability Score Point Cost 

Score Cost Score 


Cost 











in chapter 4, and might be willing to work with you to 
craft a background that’s a more precise fit for your 
character concept. 

A background gives your character a background 
feature (a general benefit) and proficiency in two skills, 
and it might also give you additional languages or 
proficiency with certain kinds of tools. Record this 
information, along with the personality information 
you develop, on your character sheet. 

Your Character’s Abilities 

Take your character’s ability scores and race into 
account as you flesh out his or her appearance 
and personality. A very strong character with low 
Intelligence might think and behave very differently 
from a very smart character with low Strength. 

For example, high Strength usually corresponds 
with a burly or athletic body, while a character with 
low Strength might be scrawny or plump. 

A character with high Dexterity is probably lithe and 
slim, while a character with low Dexterity might be 
either gangly and awkward or heavy and thick-fingered. 

A character with high Constitution usually looks 
healthy, with bright eyes and abundant energy. A 
character with low Constitution might be sickly or frail. 

A character with high Intelligence might be highly 
inquisitive and studious, while a character with low 
Intelligence might speak simply or easily forget details. 

A character with high Wisdom has good judgment, 
empathy, and a general awareness of what’s going on. 

A character with low Wisdom might be absent-minded, 
foolhardy, or oblivious. 

A character with high Charisma exudes confidence, 
which is usually mixed with a graceful or intimidating 
presence. A character with a low Charisma might come 
across as abrasive, inarticulate, or timid. 

Building Bruenor, Step 4 

Bob fills in some of Bruenor’s basic details: his name, 
his sex (male), his height and weight, and his alignment 
(lawful good). His high Strength and Constitution 
suggest a healthy, athletic body, and his low Intelligence 
suggests a degree of forgetfulness. 

Bob decides that Bruenor comes from a noble line, 
but his clan was expelled from its homeland when 
Bruenor was very young. He grew up working as a smith 
in the remote villages of Icewind Dale. But Bruenor 
has a heroic destiny—to reclaim his homeland—so 
Bob chooses the folk hero background for his dwarf. 

He notes the proficiencies and special feature this 
background gives him. 

Bob has a pretty clear picture of Bruenor’s personality 
in mind, so he skips the personality traits suggested in 
the folk hero background, noting instead that Bruenor is 
a caring, sensitive dwarf who genuinely loves his friends 
and allies, but he hides this soft heart behind a gruff, 
snarling demeanor. He chooses the ideal of fairness 
from the list in his background, noting that Bruenor 
believes that no one is above the law. 

Given his history, Bruenor’s bond is obvious: he 
aspires to someday reclaim Mithral Hall, his homeland, 
from the shadow dragon that drove the dwarves out. 


His flaw is tied to his caring, sensitive nature—he has a 
soft spot for orphans and wayward souls, leading him to 
show mercy even when it might not be warranted. 

5. Choose Equipment 

Your class and background determine your character's 
starting equipment, including weapons, armor, and 
other adventuring gear. Record this equipment on your 
character sheet. All such items are detailed in chapter 5. 

Instead of taking the gear given to you by your class 
and background, you can purchase your starting 
equipment. You have a number of gold pieces (gp) 
to spend based on your class, as shown in chapter 5. 
Extensive lists of equipment, with prices, also appear in 
that chapter. If you wish, you can also have one trinket 
at no cost (see the trinket table at the end of chapter 5). 

Your Strength score limits the amount of gear you can 
carry. Try not to purchase equipment with a total weight 
(in pounds) exceeding your Strength score times 15. 
Chapter 7 has more information on carrying capacity. 

Armor Glass 

Your Armor Class (AC) represents how well your 
character avoids being wounded in battle. Things that 
contribute to your AC include the armor you wear, the 
shield you carry, and your Dexterity modifier. Not all 
characters wear armor or carry shields, however. 

Without armor or a shield, your character’s AC equals 
10 + his or her Dexterity modifier. If your character 
wears armor, carries a shield, or both, calculate your 
AC using the rules in chapter 5. Record your AC on 
your character sheet. 

Your character needs to be proficient with armor and 
shields to wear and use them effectively, and your armor 
and shield proficiencies are determined by your class. 
There are drawbacks to wearing armor or carrying a 
shield if you lack the required proficiency, as explained 
in chapter 5. 

Some spells and class features give you a different 
way to calculate your AC. If you have multiple features 
that give you different ways to calculate your AC, you 
choose which one to use. 

Weapons 

For each weapon your character wields, calculate the 
modifier you use when you attack with the weapon and 
the damage you deal when you hit. 

When you make an attack with a weapon, you roll 
a d20 and add your proficiency bonus (but only if you 
are proficient with the weapon) and the appropriate 
ability modifier. 

• For attacks with melee weapons, use your Strength 
modifier for attack and damage rolls. A weapon that 
has the finesse property, such as a rapier, can use your 
Dexterity modifier instead. 

• For attacks with ranged weapons, use your Dexterity 
modifier for attack and damage rolls. A weapon that 
has the thrown property, such as a handaxe, can use 
your Strength modifier instead. 



Building Bruenor, Step 5 

Bob writes down the starting equipment from the 
fighter class and the folk hero background. His starting 
equipment includes chain mail and a shield, which 
combine to give Bruenor an Armor Class of 18. 

For Bruenor’s weapons, Bob chooses a battleaxe 
and two handaxes. His battleaxe is a melee weapon, 
so Bruenor uses his Strength modifier for his attacks 
and damage. His attack bonus is his Strength modifier 
(+3) plus his proficiency bonus (+2), for a total of +5. 

The battleaxe deals ld8 slashing damage, and Bruenor 
adds his Strength modifier to the damage when he 
hits, for a total of ld8 + 3 slashing damage. When 
throwing a handaxe, Bruenor has the same attack bonus 
(handaxes, as thrown weapons, use Strength for attacks 
and damage), and the weapon deals ld6 + 3 slashing 
damage when it hits. 

6. Gome Together 

Most D&D characters don’t work alone. Each character 
plays a role within a party, a group of adventurers 
working together for a common purpose. Teamwork 
and cooperation greatly improve your party’s chances 
to survive the many perils in the worlds of Dungeons 
& Dragons, Talk to your fellow players and your DM 
to decide whether your characters know one another, 
how they met, and what sorts of quests the group 
might undertake. 

Beyond 1st Level 

As your character goes on adventures and overcomes 
challenges, he or she gains experience, represented by 
experience points. A character who reaches a specified 
experience point total advances in capability. This 
advancement is called gaining a level. 

When your character gains a level, his or her class 
often grants additional features, as detailed in the 
class description. Some of these features allow you 
to increase your ability scores, either increasing two 
scores by 1 each or increasing one score by 2. You can’t 
increase an ability score above 20. In addition, every 
character’s proficiency bonus increases at certain levels. 

Each time you gain a level, you gain 1 additional Hit 
Die. Roll that Hit Die, add your Constitution modifier 
to the roll, and add the total to your hit point maximum. 
Alternatively, you can use the fixed value shown in your 
class entry, which is the average result of the die roll 
(rounded up). 

When your Constitution modifier increases by 1, your 
hit point maximum increases by 1 for each level you have 
attained. For example, when Bruenor reaches 8th level 
as a fighter, he increases his Constitution score from 17 
to 18, thus increasing his Constitution modifier from +3 
to +4. His hit point maximum then increases by 8. 

The Character Advancement table summarizes the 
XP you need to advance in levels from level 1 through 
level 20, and the proficiency bonus for a character of that 
level. Consult the information in your character’s class 
description to see what other improvements you gain 
at each level. 


Tiers of Play 

The shading in the Character Advancement table shows 
the four tiers of play. The tiers don’t have any rules 
associated with them; they are a general description of how 
the play experience changes as characters gain levels. 

In the first tier (levels 1-4), characters are effectively 
apprentice adventurers. They are learning the features 
that define them as members of particular classes, 
including the major choices that flavor their class 
features as they advance (such as a wizard’s Arcane 
Tradition or a fighter’s Martial Archetype). The threats 
they face are relatively minor, usually posing a danger to 
local farmsteads or villages. 

In the second tier (levels 5-10), characters come into 
their own. Many spellcasters gain access to 3rd-level 
spells at the start of this tier, crossing a new threshold of 
magical power with spells such as fireball and lij^htning 
bolt. At this tier, many weapon-using classes gain the 
ability to make multiple attacks in one round. These 
characters have become important, facing dangers that 
threaten cities and kingdoms. 

In the third tier (levels IT 16), characters have 
reached a level of power that sets them high above 
the ordinary populace and makes them special even 
among adventurers. At 11th level, many spellcasters 
gain access to 6th-level spells, some of which create 
effects previously impossible for player characters to 
achieve. Other characters gain features that allow them 
to make more attacks or do more impressive things with 
those attacks. These mighty adventurers often confront 
threats to whole regions and continents. 

At the fourth tier (levels 17-20), characters achieve 
the pinnacle of their class features, becoming heroic (or 
villainous) archetypes in their own right. The fate of the 
world or even the fundamental order of the multiverse 
might hang in the balance during their adventures. 

Character Advancement 


Experience Points 

Level 

Proficiency Bonus 

0 

1 

+2 

300 

2 

+2 

900 

3 

+2 

2,700 

4 

+2 

6,500 

5 

-h3 

14,000 

6 

-1-3 

23,000 

7 

-r3 

34,000 

8 

-h3 

48,000 

9 

-1-4 

64,000 

10 

4-4 

85,000 

11 

-1-4 

100,000 

12 

+4 

120,000 

13 

+5 

140,000 

14 

+5 

165,000 

15 

+5 

195,000 

16 

+5 

225,000 

17 

+6 

265,000 

18 

4-6 

305,000 

19 

4-6 

355,000 

20 

+6 










Chapter 2: Races 



VISIT TO ONE OF THE GREAT CITIES IN THE 

worlds of Dungeons & Dragons— 
Waterdeep, the Free City of Greyhawk, or 
even uncanny Sigil, the City of Doors— 
overwhelms the senses. Voices chatter in 
countless different languages. The smells 
of cooking in dozens of different cuisines 
mingle with the odors of crowded streets and poor 
sanitation. Buildings in myriad architectural styles 
display the diverse origins of their inhabitants. 

And the people themselves—people of varying size, 
shape, and color, dressed in a dazzling spectrum 
of styles and hues—represent many different races, 
from diminutive halflings and stout dwarves to 
majestically beautiful elves, mingling among a variety 
of human ethnicities. 

Scattered among the members of these more common 
races are the true exotics: a hulking dragonborn here, 
pushing his way through the crowd, and a sly tiefling 
there, lurking in the shadows with mischief in her eyes. 
A group of gnomes laughs as one of them activates a 
clever wooden toy that moves of its own accord. Half¬ 
elves and half-ores live and work alongside humans, 
without fully belonging to the races of either of their 
parents. And there, well out of the sunlight, is a lone 
drow—a fugitive from the subterranean expanse of 
the Underdark, trying to make his way in a world 
that fears his kind. 


Choosing a Race 

Humans are the most common people in the worlds of 
D&D, but they live and work alongside dwarves, elves, 
halflings, and countless other fantastic species. Your 
character belongs to one of these peoples. 

Not every intelligent race of the multiverse is 
appropriate for a player-controlled adventurer. Dwarves, 
elves, halflings, and humans are the most common 
races to produce the sort of adventurers who make up 
typical parties. Dragonborn, gnomes, half-elves, half- 
ores, and tieflings are less common as adventurers. 
Drow, a subrace of elves, are also uncommon. 

Your choice of race affects many different aspects of 
your character. It establishes fundamental qualities that 
exist throughout your character’s adventuring career. 
When making this decision, keep in mind the kind of 
character you want to play. For example, a halfling could 
be a good choice for a sneaky rogue, a dwarf makes a 
tough warrior, and an elf can be a master of arcane magic. 

Your character race not only affects your ability scores 
and traits but also provides the cues for building your 
character’s story. Each race’s description in this chapter 
includes information to help you roleplay a character of 
that race, including personality, physical appearance, 
features of society, and racial alignment tendencies. 
These details are suggestions to help you think about 
your character; adventurers can deviate widely from the 
norm for their race. It’s worthwhile to consider why your 
character is different, as a helpful way to think about 
your character’s background and personality. 


Racial Traits 

The description of each race includes racial traits that 
are common to members of that race. The following 
entries appear among the traits of most races. 

Ability Score Increase 

Every race increases one or more of a character’s 

ability scores. 

Age 

The age entry notes the age when a member of the race 
is considered an adult, as well as the race’s expected 
lifespan. This information can help you decide how 
old your character is at the start of the game. You 
can choose any age for your character, which could 
provide an explanation for some of your ability scores. 
For example, if you play a young or very old character, 
your age could explain a particularly low Strength or 
Constitution score, while advanced age could account 
for a high Intelligence or Wisdom. 

Alignment 

Most races have tendencies toward certain alignments, 
described in this entry. These are not binding for player 
characters, but considering why your dwarf is chaotic, 
for example, in defiance of lawful dwarf society can help 
you better define your character. 

Size 

Characters of most races are Medium, a size category 
including creatures that are roughly 4 to 8 feet tall. 
Members of a few races are Small (between 2 and 4 feet 
tall), which means that certain rules of the game affect 
them differently. The most important of these rules 
is that Small characters have trouble wielding heavy 
weapons, as explained in chapter 6. 

Speed 

Your speed determines how far you can move when 
traveling (chapter 8) and fighting (chapter 9). 

Languages 

By virtue of your race, your character can speak, read, 
and write certain languages. Chapter 4 lists the most 
common languages of the D&D multiverse. 

Subraces 

Some races have subraces. Members of a subrace 
have the traits of the parent race in addition to the 
traits specified for their subrace. Relationships among 
subraces vary significantly from race to race and 
world to world. In the Dragonlance campaign setting, 
for example, mountain dwarves and hill dwarves live 
together as different clans of the same people, but in 
the Forgotten Realms, they live far apart in separate 
kingdoms and call themselves shield dwarves and 
gold dwarves, respectively. 











urrii; 




Short and Stout 


V j 2^'A Bold and hardy, dwarves are known as 
skilled warriors, miners, and workers 

V of stone and metal. Though they stand 
well under 5 feet tall, dwarves are so 
broad and compact that they can weigh 
as much as a human standing nearly two 
feet taller. Their courage and endurance 
are also easily a match for any of 
the larger folk. 

Dwarven skin ranges from deep brown to a paler 
hue tinged with red, but the most common shades are 
light brown or deep tan, like certain tones of earth. 
Their hair, worn long but in simple styles, is usually 
black, gray, or brown, though paler dwarves often have 
red hair. Male dwarves value their beards highly and 
groom them carefully. 


Long Memory, Long Grudges 


Dwarves can live to be more than 400 years old, so the 
oldest living dwarves often remember a very different 
world. For example, some of the oldest dwarves living 


Dwarf 


in Citadel Felbarr (in the world of the Forgotten Realms) 
Yer late, elf! came the rough edge of a familiar recall the day, more than three centuries ago, when 


voice. Bruenor Battlehammer walked up the back of his ores conquered the fortress and drove them into an exile 


dead foe, disregarding the fact that the heavy monster lay 
on top of his elven friend. In spite of the added discomfort, 
the dwarf’s long, pointed, often-broken nose and gray- 
streaked though still-fiery red beard came as a welcome 
sight to Drizzt. “Knew I'd findye in trouble if I came out 
an’ looked for ye!’’ 

—R. A. Salvatore, The Crystal Shard 

Kingdoms rich in ancient grandeur, halls carved into the 
roots of mountains, the echoing of picks and hammers 
in deep mines and blazing forges, a commitment to 
clan and tradition, and a burning hatred of goblins and 
ores—these common threads unite all dwarves. 


that lasted over 250 years. This longevity grants them a 
perspective on the world that shorter-lived races such as 
humans and halflings lack. 

Dwarves are solid and enduring like the mountains 
they love, weathering the passage of centuries with stoic 
endurance and little change. They respect the traditions 
of their clans, tracing their ancestry back to the 
founding of their most ancient strongholds in the youth 
of the world, and don’t abandon those traditions lightly. 
Part of those traditions is devotion to the gods of the 
dwarves, who uphold the dwarven ideals of industrious 
labor, skill in battle, and devotion to the forge. 

Individual dwarves are determined and loyal, true to 
their word and decisive in action, sometimes to the point 
of stubbornness. Many dwarves have a strong sense 































of justice, and they are slow to forget wrongs they have 
suffered. A wrong done to one dwarf is a wrong done to 
the dwarf’s entire clan, so what begins as one dwarf’s 
hunt for vengeance can become a full-blown clan feud. 

Clans and Kingdoms 

Dwarven kingdoms stretch deep beneath the mountains 
where the dwarves mine gems and precious metals 
and forge items of wonder. They love the beauty and 
artistry of precious metals and fine jewelry, and in some 
dwarves this love festers into avarice. Whatever wealth 
they can’t find in their mountains, they gain through 
trade. They dislike boats, so enterprising humans and 
halflings frequently handle trade in dwarven goods 
along water routes. Trustworthy members of other races 
are welcome in dwarf settlements, though some areas 
are off limits even to them. 

The chief unit of dwarven society is the clan, and 
dwarves highly value social standing. Even dwarves 
who live far from their own kingdoms cherish their clan 
identities and affiliations, recognize related dwarves, 
and invoke their ancestors’ names in oaths and curses. 
To be clanless is the worst fate that can befall a dwarf. 

Dwarves in other lands are typically artisans, 
especially weaponsmiths, armorers, and jewelers. Some 
become mercenaries or bodyguards, highly sought after 
for their courage and loyalty. 

Gods, Gold, and Clan 

Dwarves who take up the adventuring life might be 
motivated by a desire for treasure—for its own sake, for 
a specific purpose, or even out of an altruistic desire to 
help others. Other dwarves are driven by the command 
or inspiration of a deity, a direct calling or simply a 
desire to bring glory to one of the dwarf gods. Clan and 
ancestry are also important motivators. A dwarf might 
seek to restore a clan's lost honor, avenge an ancient 
wrong the clan suffered, or earn a new place within the 
clan after having been exiled. Or a dwarf might search 
for the axe wielded by a mighty ancestor, lost on the field 
of battle centuries ago. 



Slow to Trust 

Dwarves get along passably well with most other races. “The 
difference between an acquaintance and a friend is about a 
hundred years,” is a dwarf saying that might be hyperbole, 
but certainly points to how difficult it can be for a member of 
a short-lived race like humans to earn a dwarf’s trust. 

Elves. “It’s not wise to depend on the elves. No telling what 
an elf will do next; when the hammer meets the ore’s head, 
they’re as apt to start singing as to pull out a sword. They’re 
flighty and frivolous. Two things to be said for them, though: 
They don’t have many smiths, but the ones they have do very 
fine work. And when ores or goblins come streaming down 
out of the mountains, an elf’s good to have at your back. Not 
as good as a dwarf, maybe, but no doubt they hate the ores 
as much as we do.” 

Halflings. “Sure, they’re pleasant folk. But show me a 
halfling hero. An empire, a triumphant army. Even a treasure 
for the ages made by halfling hands. Nothing. How can you 
take them seriously?” 

Humans. “You take the time to get to know a human, and 
by then the human’s on her deathbed. If you’re lucky, she’s 
got kin—a daughter or granddaughter, maybe—who’s got 
hands and heart as good as hers. That’s when you can make 
a human friend. And watch them go! They set their hearts on 
something, they’ll get it, whether it's a dragon’s hoard or an 
empire’s throne. You have to admire that kind of dedication, 
even if it gets them in trouble more often than not,” 




I 

I 


I 


Dwarf Names 

A dwarf’s name is granted by a clan elder, in accordance 
with tradition. Every proper dwarven name has been 
used and reused down through the generations. A 
dwarf’s name belongs to the clan, not to the individual. 

A dwarf who misuses or brings shame to a clan name 
is stripped of the name and forbidden by law to use any 
dwarven name in its place. 

Male Names: Adrik, Alberich, Baern, Barendd, Brottor, 
Bruenor, Dain, Darrak, Delg, Eberk, Einkil, Fargrim, 
Flint, Gardain, Harbek, Kildrak, Morgran, Orsik, 
Oskar, Rangrim, Rurik, Taklinn, Thoradin, Thorin, 
Tordek, Traubon, Travok, Ulfgar, Veit, Vondal 
Female Names: Amber, Artin, Audhild, Bardryn, 

Dagnal, Diesa, Eldeth, Falkrunn, Finellen, Gunnloda, 
Gurdis, Helja, Hlin, Kathra, Kristryd, Ilde, Liftrasa, 
Mardred, Riswynn, Sannl, Torbera, Torgga, Vistra 
Clan Names: Balderk, Battlehammer, Brawnanvil, 
Dankil, Fireforge, Frostbeard, Gorunn, Flolderhek, 
Ironfist, Loderr, Lutgehr, Rumnaheim, Strakeln, 
Torunn, Ungart 

Dwarf Traits 

Your dwarf character has an assortment of inborn 
abilities, part and parcel of dwarven nature. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score 
increases by 2. 

A^e. Dwarves mature at the same rate as humans, but 
they’re considered young until they reach the age of 50. 
On average, they live about 350 years. 

Alignment Most dwarves are lawful, believing firmly 
in the benefits of a well-ordered society. They tend 
toward good as well, with a strong sense of fair play and 
a belief that everyone deserves to share in the benefits of 
a just order. 

Size. Dwarves stand between 4 and 5 feet tall and 
average about 150 pounds. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet. Your 
speed is not reduced by wearing heavy armor. 

Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you 
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You 
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were 
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You 
can’t discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Dwarven Resilience. You have advantage on saving 
throws against poison, and you have resistance against 
poison damage (explained in chapter 9). 

Dwarven Combat Training. You have proficiency 
with the battleaxe, handaxe, throwing hammer, 
and warhammer. 


Tool Proficiency. You gain proficiency with the 
artisan’s tools of your choice: smith’s tools, brewer’s 
supplies, or mason’s tools. 

Stonecunning. Whenever you make an Intelligence 
(Flistory) check related to the origin of stonework, you 
are considered proficient in the Flistory skill and add 
double your proficiency bonus to the check, instead of 
your normal proficiency bonus. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Dwarvish. Dwarvish is full of hard consonants and 
guttural sounds, and those characteristics spill over into 
whatever other language a dwarf might speak. 

Subrace. Two main subraces of dwarves populate the 
worlds of D&D: hill dwarves and mountain dwarves. 
Choose one of these subraces. 

Hill Dwarf 

As a hill dwarf, you have keen senses, deep intuition, 
and remarkable resilience. The gold dwarves of Faerun 
in their mighty southern kingdom are hill dwarves, as 
are the exiled Neidar and the debased Klar of Krynn in 
the Dragonlance setting. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score 
increases by 1. 

Dwarven Toughness. Your hit point maximum 
increases by 1, and it increases by 1 every time you 
gain a level. 

Mountain Dwarf 

As a mountain dwarf, you’re strong and hardy, 
accustomed to a difficult life in rugged terrain. You’re 
probably on the tall side (for a dwarf), and tend toward 
lighter coloration. The shield dwarves of northern 
Faerun, as well as the ruling Hylar clan and the noble 
Daewar clan of Dragonlance, are mountain dwarves. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2. 

Dwarven Armor Training. You have proficiency with 
light and medium armor. 

.M _k. 

Duercar 

In cities deep in the Underdark live the duergar, or gray 
dwarves. These vicious, stealthy slave traders raid the surface •". 
world for captives, then sell their prey to the other races of 
the Underdark. They have innate magical abilities to become i 
invisible and to temporarily grow to giant size. 







Elf 


“I HAVE NEVER IMAGINED SUCH BEAUTY EXISTED,” 

Goldmoon said softly. The day’s march had been difficult, 
but the reward at the end was beyond their dreams. 

The companions stood on a high cliff over the fabled 
cily of Qualinost. 

Four slender spires rose from the city’s corners like glisten¬ 
ing spindles, their brilliant white stone marbled with shining 
silver. Graceful arches, swooping from spire to spire, soared 
through the air. Crafted by ancient dwarven metalsmiths, 
they were strong enough to hold the weight of an army.yet 
they appeared so delicate that a bird lighting on them might 
overthrow the balance. These glistening arches were the 
city’s only boundaries: there was no wall around Qualinost. 
The elven city opened its arms lovingly to the wilderness. 

—Margaret Weis & Tracy Hickman, 
Dragons of Autumn Twilight 



Elves are a magical people of otherworldly grace, living 
in the world but not entirely part of it. They live in 
places of ethereal beauty, in the midst of ancient forests 
or in silvery spires glittering with faerie light, where 
soft music drifts through the air and gentle fragrances 
waft on the breeze. Elves love nature and magic, art 
and artistry, music and poetry, and the good things 
of the world. 


females are about the same height, and males are only 
marginally heavier than females. 

Elves’ coloration encompasses the normal human 
range and also includes skin in shades of copper, 
bronze, and almost bluish-white, hair of green or blue, 
and eyes like pools of liquid gold or silver. Elves have no 
facial and little body hair. They favor elegant clothing in 
bright colors, and they enjoy simple yet lovely jewelry. 


Slender and Graceful 

With their unearthly grace and fine features, elves 
appear hauntingly beautiful to humans and members 
of many other races. They are slightly shorter than 
humans on average, ranging from well under 5 feet 
tall to just over 6 feet. They are more slender than 
humans, weighing only 100 to 145 pounds. Males and 


A Timeless Perspective 

Elves can live well over 700 years, giving them a broad 
perspective on events that might trouble the shorter- 
lived races more deeply. They are more often amused 
than excited, and more likely to be curious than 
greedy. They tend to remain aloof and unfazed by petty 
happenstance. When pursuing a goal, however, whether 



adventuring on a mission or learning a new skill or art, 
elves can be focused and relentless. They are slow to 
make friends and enemies, and even slower to forget 
them. They reply to petty insults with disdain and to 
serious insults with vengeance. 

Like the branches of a young tree, elves are flexible 
in the face of danger. They trust in diplomacy and 
compromise to resolve differences before they escalate 
to violence. They have been known to retreat from 
intrusions into their woodland homes, confident 
that they can simply wait the invaders out. But when 
the need arises, elves reveal a stern martial side, 
demonstrating skill with sword, bow, and strategy. 

Hidden Woodland Realms 

Most elves dwell in small forest villages hidden among 
the trees. Elves hunt game, gather food, and grow 
vegetables, and their skill and magic allow them to 
support themselves without the need for clearing and 
plowing land. They are talented artisans, crafting finely 
worked clothes and art objects. Their contact with 
outsiders is usually limited, though a few elves make a 
good living by trading crafted items for metals (which 
they have no interest in mining). 

Elves encountered outside their own lands are 
commonly traveling minstrels, artists, or sages. Human 
nobles compete for the services of elf instructors to 
teach swordplay or magic to their children. 

Exploration and Adventure 

Elves take up adventuring out of wanderlust. Since 
they are so long-lived, they can enjoy centuries of 
exploration and discovery. They dislike the pace of 
human society, which is regimented from day to day but 
constantly changing over decades, so they find careers 
that let them travel freely and set their own pace. Elves 
also enjoy exercising their martial prowess or gaining 
greater magical power, and adventuring allows them 


to do so. Some might join with rebels fighting against 
oppression, and others might become champions of 
moral causes. 

Ele Names 

Elves are considered children until they declare 
themselves adults, some time after the hundredth 
birthday, and before this period they are called 
by child names. 

On declaring adulthood, an elf selects an adult name, 
although those who knew him or her as a youngster 
might continue to use the child name. Each elf’s adult 
name is a unique creation, though it might reflect 
the names of respected individuals or other family 
members. Little distinction exists between male 
names and female names; the groupings here reflect 
only general tendencies. In addition, every elf bears a 
family name, typically a combination of other Elvish 
words. Some elves traveling among humans translate 
their family names into Common, but others retain the 
Elvish version. 

Child Names: Ara, Bryn, Del, Eryn, Faen, Innil. 

Lael, Mella, Naill, Naeris, Phann, Rael, Rinn, Sai, 
Syllin, Thia, Vail 

Male Adult Names: Adran, Aelar, Aramil, Arannis, 

Aust, Beiro, Berrian, Carrie, Enialis, Erdan, Erevan, 
Galinndan, Hadarai, Heian, Himo, Immeral, Ivellios, 
Laucian, Mindartis, Paelias, Peren, Quarion, Riardon, 
Rolen, Soveliss, Thamior, Tharivol, Theren, Varis 
















Haughty but Gracious 

Although they can be haughty, elves are generally gracious 
even to those who fall short of their high expectations— 
which is most non-elves. Still, they can find good in just 
about anyone. 

Divari/es. “Dwarves are dull, clumsy oafs. But what they 
lack in humor, sophistication, and manners, they make up in 
valor. And I must admit, their best smiths produce art that 
approaches elven quality.” 

Halflings. “Halflings are people of simple pleasures, and 
that is not a quality to scorn. They're good folk, they care 
for each other and tend their gardens, and they have proven 
themselves tougher than they seem when the need arises." 

Humans. “All that haste, their ambition and drive to 
accomplish something before their brief lives pass away— 
human endeavors seem so futile sometimes. But then 
you look at what they have accomplished, and you have to 
appreciate their achievements. If only they could slow down 
and learn some refinement." 


Female Adult Names: Adrie, Althaea, Anastrianna, 
Andraste, Antinua, Bethrynna, Birel, Caelynn, 
Drusilia, Enna, Felosial, lelenia, Jelenneth, Keyleth, 
Leshanna, Lia, Meriele, Mialee, Naivara, Quelenna, 
Quillathe, Sariel, Shanairra, Shava, Silaqui, 
Theirastra, Thia, Vadania, Valanthe, Xanaphia 
Family Names (Common Translations): Amakiir 
(Gemflower), Amastacia (Starflower), Galanodel 
(Moonwhisper), Holimion (Diamonddew), Ilphelkiir 
(Gemblossom), Liadon (Silverfrond), Meliamne 
(Oakenheel), Nailo (Nightbreeze), Siannodel 
(Moonbrook), Xiloscient (Goldpetal) 


Elf Traits 

Your elf character has a variety of natural abilities, the 
result of thousands of years of elven refinement. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score 
increases by 2. 

4^e. Although elves reach physical maturity at about 
the same age as humans, the elven understanding of 
adulthood goes beyond physical growth to encompass 
worldly experience. An elf typically claims adulthood 
and an adult name around the age of 100 and can live 
to be 750 years old. 

Alignment. Elves love freedom, variety, and self- 
expression, so they lean strongly toward the gentler 
aspects of chaos. They value and protect others' 
freedom as well as their own, and they are more 
often good than not. The drow are an exception; their 
exile into the Underdark has made them vicious and 
dangerous. Drow are more often evil than not. 

Size. Elves range from under 5 to over 6 feet tall and 
have slender builds. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. Accustomed to twilit forests and the night 
sky, you have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. 
You can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it 
were bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. 
You can’t discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the 
Perception skill. 

Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed, and magic can’t put you to sleep. 


Trance. Elves don’t need to sleep. Instead, they 
meditate deeply, remaining semiconscious, for 4 
hours a day. (The Common word for such meditation 
is “trance.”) While meditating, you can dream after a 
fashion; such dreams are actually mental exercises that 
have become reflexive through years of practice. After 
resting in this way, you gain the same benefit that a 
human does from 8 hours of sleep. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Elvish. Elvish is fluid, with subtle intonations and 
intricate grammar. Elven literature is rich and varied, 
and their songs and poems are famous among other 
races. Many bards learn their language so they can add 
Elvish ballads to their repertoires. 

Subrace. Ancient divides among the elven people 
resulted in three main subraces: high elves, wood elves, 
and dark elves, who are commonly called drow. Choose 
one of these subraces. In some worlds, these subraces 
are divided still further (such as the sun elves and moon 
elves of the Forgotten Realms), so if you wish, you can 
choose a narrower subrace. 

High Elf 

As a high elf, you have a keen mind and a mastery of 
at least the basics of magic. In many of the worlds 
of D&D, there are two kinds of high elves. One type 
(which includes the gray elves and valley elves of 
Greyhawk, the Silvanesti of Dragonlance, and the 
sun elves of the Forgotten Realms) is haughty and 
reclusive, believing themselves to be superior to 
non-elves and even other elves. The other type 
(including the high elves of Greyhawk. the 
Qualinesti of Dragonlance, and the moon elves 
of the Forgotten Realms) are more common 
and more friendly, and often encountered 
among humans and other races. 

The sun elves of Faerun (also called gold 
elves or sunrise elves) have bronze skin and 
hair of copper, black, or golden blond. Their 
eyes are golden, silver, or black. Moon elves (also 
called silver elves or gray elves) are much paler, 
with alabaster skin sometimes tinged with blue. 

They often have hair of silver-white, black, or blue, 
but various shades of blond, brown, and red are 
not uncommon. Their eyes are blue or green and 
flecked with gold. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score 
increases by 1. 

Elf Weapon Training. You have proficiency with 
the longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow. 

















I 

I 


\ 


Cantrip. You know one cantrip of your choice from 
the wizard spell list. Intelligence is your spellcasting 
ability for it. 

Extra Language. You can speak, read, and write one 
extra language of your choice. 

Wood Elf 

As a wood elf, you have keen senses and intuition, and 
your fleet feet carry you quickly and stealthily through 
your native forests. This category includes the wild 
elves (grugach) of Greyhawk and the Kagonesti of 
Dragonlance, as well as the races called wood elves in 
Greyhawk and the Forgotten Realms. In Faerun, wood 
elves (also called wild elves, green elves, or forest elves) 
are reclusive and distrusting of non-elves. 

Wood elves’ skin tends to be copperish in hue, 
sometimes with traces of green. Their hair tends toward 
browns and blacks, but it is occasionally blond or 
copper-colored. Their eyes are green, brown, or hazel. 


Dark Elf (Drow) 

Descended from an earlier subrace of dark-skinned 
elves, the drow were banished from the surface world 
for following the goddess Lolth down the path to 
evil and corruption. Now they have built their own 
civilization in the depths of the Underdark, patterned 
after the Way of Lolth. Also called dark elves, the drow 
have black skin that resembles polished obsidian and 
stark white or pale yellow hair. They commonly have 
very pale eyes (so pale as to be mistaken for white) in 
shades of lilac, silver, pink, red, and blue. They tend to 
be smaller and thinner than most elves. 

Drow adventurers are rare, and the race does not exist 
in all worlds. Check with your Dungeon Master to see 
if you can play a drow character. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score 
increases by 1. 

Superior Darkvision. Your darkvision has a 
radius of 120 feet. 


Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score Sunlight Sensitivity. You have disadvantage on attack 

increases by 1. rolls and on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on 

Elf Weapon Training. You have proficiency with the sight when you, the target of your attack, or whatever 



increases to 35 feet. 


longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow. 
Fleet of Foot. Your base walking speed 


Mask of the Wild. You can attempt to hide even when 
you are only lightly obscured by foliage, heavy rain, 
falling snow, mist, and other natural phenomena. 


you are trying to perceive is in direct sunlight. 

Drow Magic. You know the dancing lights cantrip. 
When you reach 3rd level, you can cast the faerie fire 
spell once per day. When you reach 5th level, you can 
also cast the darkness spell once per day. Charisma is 
your spellcasting ability for these spells. 

Drow Weapon Training. You have proficiency with 
rapiers, shortswords, and hand crossbows. 


The Darkness of the Drow 

Were it not for one renowned exception, the race of drow 
would be universally reviled. To most, they are a race of 
demon-worshiping marauders dwelling in the subterranean 
depths of the Underdark, emerging only on the blackest 
nights to pillage and slaughter the surface dwellers they 
despise. Their society is depraved and preoccupied with the 
favor of Lolth, their spider-goddess, who sanctions murder 
and the extermination of entire families as noble houses 
vie for position. 

Yet one drow, at least, broke the mold. In the world of the 
Forgotten Realms, Drizzt Do'Urden, ranger of the North, has 
proven his quality as a good-hearted defender of the weak 
and innocent. Rejecting his heritage and adrift in a world that 
looks upon him with terror and ioathing, Drizzt is a model 
for those few drow who follow in his footsteps, trying to find 
a life apart from the evil society oftheir Underdark homes. 

Drow grow up believing that surface-dwelling races are 
inferior, worthless except as slaves. Drow who develop a 
conscience or find it necessary to cooperate with members of 
other races find it hard to overcome that prejudice, especially 
when they are so often on the receiving end of hatred. 





















% 


I 



Halfling 

Regis the halfling, the only one of his kind for 
hundreds of miles in any direction, locked his fingers be¬ 
hind his head and leaned back against the mos^ blanket 
of the tree trunk. Regis was short, even by the standards 
of his diminutive race, with the fluff of his curly brown 
locks barely cresting the three-foot mark, but his belly was 
amply thickened by his love of a good meal, or several, as 
the opportunities presented themselves. The crooked stick 


The comforts of liome are the goals of most halflings' 

lives; a place lo seiile in peace and quiet, far from 
marauding monsters and clashing armies; a blazing fire 
and a generous meal; fine drink and fine conversation. 
Though some halflings live out their days in remote 
agricultural communities, others form nomadic bands 
that travel constantly, lured by the open road and the 
wide horizon to discover the wonders of new lands and 
peoples. But even these wanderers love peace, food, 
hearth, and home, though home might be a wagon 
jostling along an dirt road or a raft floating downriver. 


Kind and Curious 


Small and Practical 


The diminutive halflings survive in a world full of larger 
creatures by avoiding notice or, barring that, avoiding 
offense. Standing about 3 feet tall, they appear relatively 
harmless and so have managed to survive for centuries 
in the shadow of empires and on the edges of wars and 
political strife. They are inclined to be stout, weighing 
between 40 and 45 pounds. 

Halflings’ skin ranges from tan to pale with a ruddy 
cast, and their hair is usually brown or sandy brown 
and wavy. They have brown or hazel eyes. Halfling men 
often sport long sideburns, but beards are rare among 
them and mustaches even more so. They like to wear 
simple, comfortable, and practical clothes, favoring 
bright colors. 

Halfling practicality extends beyond their clothing. 
They’re concerned with basic needs and simple 
pleasures and have little use for ostentation. Even the 
wealthiest of halflings keep their treasures locked in a 
cellar rather than on display for all to see. They have 
a knack for finding the most straightforward solution 
to a problem, and have little patience for dithering. 


that served as his fishing pole rose up above him, clenched Halflings are an affable and cheerful people. They 


between two of his toes, and hung out over the quiet lake, 
mirrored perfectly in the glassy surface ofMaer Dualdon. 


cherish the bonds of family and friendship as well 
as the comforts of hearth and home, harboring few 
dreams of gold or glory. Even adventurers among 


R.A. Salvatore, The Crystal Shard them usually venture into the world for reasons of 














community, friendship, wanderlust, or curiosity. They ^ 
love discovering new things, even simple things, such 
as an exotic food or an unfamiliar style of clothing. 

Halflings are easily moved to pity and hate to see any 
living thing suffer. They are generous, happily sharing 
what they have even in lean times. 

Blend mxo the Crowd 

Halflings are adept at fitting into a community of 
humans, dwarves, or elves, making themselves valuable 
and welcome. The combination of their inherent stealth 
and their unassuming nature helps halflings to avoid 
unwanted attention. 

Halflings work readily with others, and they are loyal 
to their friends, whether halfling or otherwise. They can 
display remarkable ferocity when their friends, families, 
or communities are threatened. 

Pastoral Pleasa.ntries 

Most halflings live in small, peaceful communities with 
large farms and well-kept groves. They rarely build 
kingdoms of their own or even hold much land beyond 
their quiet shires. They typically don’t recognize any 
sort of halfling nobility or royalty, instead looking to 
family elders to guide them. Families preserve their 
traditional ways despite the rise and fall of empires. 

Many halflings live among other races, where the 
halflings’ hard work and loyal outlook offer them 
abundant rewards and creature comforts. Some halfling 
communities travel as a way of life, driving wagons or 


Affable and Positive 


Halflings try to get along with everyone else and are loath to 


make sweeping generalizations—especially negative ones 


I Dwarves. “Dwarves make loyal friends, and you can count 


on them to keep their word. But would it hurt them to smile 


once in a while.!* 


Elves. "They're so beautiful! Their faces, their music, their 


grace and all. It’s like they stepped out of a wonderful dream. ^ 
But there's no telling what's going on behind their smiling 
faces—surely more than they ever let on.” 

Humans. “Humans are a lot like us, really. At least some 
of them are. Step out of the castles and keeps, go talk to the 
farmers and herders and you’ll find good, solid folk. Not that 
there’s anything wrong with the barons and soldiers—you 
have to admire their conviction. And by protecting their own 
lands, they protect us as well.” 

---r- 

Exploring Opportunities 

Halflings usually set out on the adventurer’s path to 
defend their communities, support their friends, or 
explore a wide and wonder-filled world. For them, 
adventuring is less a career than an opportunity or 
sometimes a necessity. 

Halfling Names 

A halfling has a given name, a family name, and possibly 
a nickname. Family names are often nicknames that 
stuck so tenaciously they have been passed down 
through the generations. 

Male Names: Alton, Ander, Cade, Corrin, Eldon, Errich, 
Finnan, Garret, Lindal, Lyle, Merric, Milo, Osborn, 
Perrin, Reed, Roscoe, Wellby 
Female Names: Andry, Bree, Callie, Cora, Euphemia, 
Jillian, Kithri, Lavinia, Lidda, Merla, Nedda, Paela, 
Portia, Seraphina, Shaena, Trym, Vani, Verna 
Family Names: Brushgather, Goodbarrel, Greenbottle, 
High-hill, Hilltopple, Leagallow, Tealeaf, Thorngage, 
Tosscobble, Underbough 


k 


guiding boats from place to place and maintaining no 


permanent home. 
















Halfling Traits 


Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Halfling. The Halfling language isn’t secret, but 
halflings are loath to share it with others. They write 
very little, so they don't have a rich body of literature. 
Their oral tradition, however, is very strong. Almost all 
halflings speak Common to converse with the people 
in whose lands they dwell or through which they 
are traveling. 

Subrace. The two main kinds of halfling, lightfoot and 
stout, are more like closely related families than true 
subraces. Choose one of these subraces. 


Your halfling character has a number of traits in 
common with all other halflings. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score 
increases by 2. 

A^e. A halfling reaches adulthood at the age of 
20 and generally lives into the middle of his or her 
second century. 

Alignment. Most halflings are lawful good. As a rule, 
they are good-hearted and kind, hate to see others in 
pain, and have no tolerance for oppression. They are 
also very orderly and traditional, leaning heavily on 
the support of their community and the comfort of 
their old ways. 

Size. Halflings average about 3 feet tall and weigh 
about 40 pounds. Your size is Small. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet. 

Lucky. When you roll a 1 on an attack roll, ability 
check, or saving throw, you can reroll the die and must 
use the new roll. 

Brave. You have advantage on saving throws against 
being frightened. 

Halfling Nimbleness. You can move through the 
space of any creature that is of a size larger than yours. 


Lightfoot 

As a lightfoot halfling, you can easily hide from notice, 
even using other people as cover. You’re inclined to be 
affable and get along well with others. In the Forgotten 
Realms, lightfoot halflings have spread the farthest and 
thus are the most common variety. 

Lightfoots are more prone to wanderlust than other 
halflings, and often dwell alongside other races or take 
up a nomadic life. In the world of Greyhawk, these 
halflings are called hairfeet or tallfellows. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score 
increases by 1. 

Naturally Stealthy. You can attempt to hide even 
when you are obscured only by a creature that is at least 
one size larger than you. 


Stout 

As a stout halfling, you’re hardier than average and have 
some resistance to poison. Some say that stouts have 
dwarven blood. In the Forgotten Realms, these halflings 
are called stronghearts, and they’re most common 
in the south. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score 
increases by 1. 

Stout Resilience. You have advantage on saving 
throws against poison, and you have resistance 
against poison damage. 



















Human 

These were the stories of a restless people who 
long ago took to the seas and rivers in longboats, first to 
pillage and terrorize, then to settle. Yet there was an energy 
a love of adventure, that sang from every page. Longinto 
the night Uriel read, lighting candle after precious candle. 

She'd never given much thought to humans, but these 
stories fascinated her. In theseyellowed pages were tales of 
bold heroes, strange and fierce animals, mighty primitive gods, 
and a magic that was part and fabric of that distant land. 

—Elaine Cunningham, Daughter of the Drow 

In the reckonings of most worlds, humans are the 
youngest of the common races, late to arrive on the 
world scene and short-lived in comparison to dwarves, 
elves, and dragons. Perhaps it is because of their shorter 
lives that they strive to achieve as much as they can in 
the years they are given. Or maybe they feel they have 
something to prove to the elder races, and that’s why 
they build their mighty empires on the foundation of 
conquest and trade. Whatever drives them, humans 
are the innovators, the achievers, and the pioneers 
of the worlds. 

A Broad Spectrum 

With their penchant for migration and conquest, 
humans are more physically diverse than other common 
races. There is no typical human. An individual can 
stand from 5 feet to a little over 6 feet tall and weigh 
from 125 to 250 pounds. Human skin shades range 
from nearly black to very pale, and hair colors from 
black to blond (curly, kinky, or straight): males might 
sport facial hair that is sparse or thick. A lot of humans 
have a dash of nonhuman blood, revealing hints of elf, 
ore, or other lineages. Humans reach adulthood in their 
late teens and rarely live even a single century. 



Variety in All Things 

Humans are the most adaptable and ambitious people 
among the common races. They have widely varying 
tastes, morals, and customs in the many different lands 
where they have settled. When they settle, though, 
they stay: they build cities to last for the ages, and 
great kingdoms that can persist for long centuries. An 
individual human might have a relatively short life span, 
but a human nation or culture preserves traditions 
with origins far beyond the reach of any single human’s 
memory. They live fully in the present—making them 
well suited to the adventuring life—but also plan for the 
future, striving to leave a lasting legacy. Individually and 
as a group, humans are adaptable opportunists, and 
they stay alert to changing political and social dynamics. 









Just as readily as they mix with each other, humans mingle 
with members of other races. They get along with almost 
everyone, though they might not be close to many. Humans 
serve as ambassadors, diplomats, magistrates, merchants, 
and functionaries of all kinds. 

Divari/es. "They're stout folk, stalwart friends, and true to 
their word. Their greed for gold is their downfall, though.” 

Elves. “It's best not to wander into elven woods. They don’t 
like intruders, and you'll as likely be bewitched as peppered 
with arrows. Still, if an elf can get past that damned racial 
pride and actually treat you like an equal, you can learn a lot 
from them.” 

Halfl'mgs. "It's hard to beat a meal in a halfling home, as 
long as you don't crack your head on the ceiling—good food 
and good stories in front of a nice, warm fire. If halflings had 
a shred of ambition, they might really amount to something.” 

^ r 

Lasting ^NSTiTUTi^s__ 

Where a single elf or dwarf might take on the 
responsibility of guarding a special location or a 
powerful secret, humans found sacred orders and 
institutions for such purposes. While dwarf clans and 
halfling elders pass on the ancient traditions to each 
new generation, human temples, governments, libraries, 
and codes of law fix their traditions in the bedrock of 
history. Humans dream of immortality, but (except for 
those few who seek undeath or divine ascension to 
escape death’s clutches) they achieve it by ensuring that 
they will be remembered when they are gone. 

Although some humans can be xenophobic, in 
general their societies are inclusive. Human lands 
welcome large numbers of nonhumans compared to the 
proportion of humans who live in nonhuman lands. 

Exemplars OF Ambition 

Humans who seek adventure are the most daring and 
ambitious members of a daring and ambitious race. 

They seek to earn glory in the eyes of their fellows 
by amassing power, wealth, and fame. More than 
other people, humans champion causes rather than 
territories or groups. 

Human Names and Ethnicities 

Having so much more variety than other cultures, 
humans as a whole have no typical names. Some human 


parents give their children names from other languages 
such as Dwarvish or Elvish (pronounced more or less 
correctly), but most parents give names that are linked 


to their region’s culture or to the naming traditions of 


their ancestors. 


The material culture and physical characteristics 
of humans can change wildly from region to region. 

In the Forgotten Realms, for example, the clothing, 
architecture, cuisine, music, and literature are different 
in the northwestern lands of the Silver Marches than 
in distant Turmish or Impiltur to the east—and even 
more distinctive in far-off Kara-Tur. Human physical 
characteristics, though, vary according to the ancient 
migrations of the earliest humans, so that the humans 
of the Silver Marches have every possible variation of 
coloration and features. 

In the Forgotten Realms, nine human ethnic groups 
are widely recognized, though over a dozen others are 
found in more localized areas of Faerun. These groups, 
and the typical names of their members, can be used as 
inspiration no matter which world your human is in. 

Calishite 

Shorter and slighter in build than most other humans, 
Calishites have dusky brown skin, hair, and eyes. 
They’re found primarily in southwest Faerun. 

Calishite Names: (Male) Aseir, Bardeid, Haseid, 
Khemed, Mehmen, Sudeiman, Zasheir; (female) 

Atala, Ceidil, Hama, Jasmal, Meilil, Seipora, Yasheira, 
Zasheida; (surnames) Basha, Dumein, Jassan, Khalid, 
Mostana, Pashar, Rein 

Chondathan 

Chondathans are slender, tawny-skinned folk with 
brown hair that ranges from almost blond to almost 
black. Most are tall and have green or brown eyes, 
but these traits are hardly universal. Humans of 
Chondathan descent dominate the central lands of 
Faerun, around the Inner Sea. 



























Chondathan Names: (Male) Darvin, Dorn, Evendur, 
Gorstag, Grim. Helm, Malark, Morn, Randal, 

Stedd; (female) Arveene, Esvele, Jhessail, Kerri, 
Lureene, Miri, Rowan, Shandri, Tessele; (surnames) 
Amblecrown, Buckman, Dundragon, Evenwood, 
Greycastle, Tallstag 

Damaran 

Found primarily in the northwest of Faerun, Damarans 
are of moderate height and build, with skin hues 
ranging from tawny to fair. Their hair is usually brown 
or black, and their eye color varies widely, though brown 
is most common. 

Damaran Names: (Male) Bor, Fodel, Glar, Grigor, 

Igan, Ivor, Kosef, Mival, Orel, Pavel, Sergor; (female) 
Alethra, Kara, Katernin, Mara, Natali, Olma, Tana, 
Zora; (surnames) Bersk, Chernin, Dotsk, Kulenov, 
Marsk, Nemetsk, Shemov, Starag 

Illuskan 

Illuskans are tall, fair-skinned folk with blue or steely 
gray eyes. Most have raven-black hair, but those who 
inhabit the extreme northwest have blond, red, or 
light brown hair. 

Illuskan Names: (Male) Ander, Blath, Bran, Frath, 

Geth, Lander, Luth, Malcer, Stor, Taman, Urth; 
(female) Amafrey, Betha, Cefrey, Kethra, Mara, Olga, 
Silifrey, Westra; (surnames) Brightwood, Helder, 
Hornraven, Lackman, Stormwind, Windrivver 


Shou 

The Shou are the most numerous and powerful ethnic 
group in Kara-Tur, far to the east of Faerun. They are 
yellowish-bronze in hue, with black hair and dark 
eyes. Shou surnames are usually presented before 
the given name. 

Shou Names: (Male) An, Chen, Chi, Fai, Jiang, Jun, 

Lian, Long, Meng, On, Shan, Shui, Wen; (female) 

Bai, Chao, Jia, Lei, Mei, Qiao, Shui, Tai; (surnames) 
Chien, Huang, Kao, Kung, Lao, Ling, Mei, Pin, Shin, 
Sum, Tan, Wan 

Tethyrian 

Widespread along the entire Sword Coast at the 
western edge of Faerun, Tethyrians are of medium build 
and height, with dusky skin that tends to grow fairer 
the farther north they dwell. Their hair and eye color 
varies widely, but brown hair and blue eyes are the most 
common, Tethyrians primarily use Chondathan names. 

Turami 

Native to the southern shore of the Inner Sea, the 
Turami people are generally tall and muscular, with 
dark mahogany skin, curly black hair, and dark eyes. 

Turami Names: (Male) Anton, Diero, Marcon, Pieron, 
Rimardo, Romero, Salazar, Umbero; (female) Balama, 
Dona, Faila, Jalana, Luisa, Marta, Quara, Selise, 
Vonda: (surnames) Agosto, Astorio, Calabra, Domine, 
Falone, Marivaldi, Pisacar, Ramondo 


Mulan 

Dominant in the eastern and southeastern shores of 
the Inner Sea, the Mulan are generally tall, slim, and 
amber-skinned, with eyes of hazel or brown. Their hair 
ranges from black to dark brown, but in the lands where 
the Mulan are most prominent, nobles and many other 
Mulan shave off all their hair. 

Mulan Names: (Male) Aoth, Bareris, Ehput-Ki, 

Kethoth, Mumed, Ramas, So-Kehur, Thazar-De, 
Urhur; (female) Arizima, Chathi, Nephis, Nulara, 
Murithi, Sefris, Thola, Umara, Zolis; (surnames) 
Ankhalab, Anskuld, Fezim, Hahpet, Nathandem, 
Sepret, Uuthrakt 

Rashemi 

Most often found east of the Inner Sea and often 
intermingled with the Mulan, Rashemis tend to be short, 
stout, and muscular. They usually have dusky skin, dark 
eyes, and thick black hair. 

Rashemi Names: (Male) Borivik, Faurgar, Jandar, 
Kanithar, Madislak, Ralmevik, Shaumar, Vladislak; 
(female) Fyevarra, Hulmarra, Immith, Imzel, 

Navarra, Shevarra, Tammith. Yuldra; (surnames) 
Chergoba, Dyernina, Iltazyara, Murnyethara, 
Stayanoga, Ulmokina 



Human Traits 

It’s hard to make generalizations about humans, but 
your human character has these traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your ability scores each 
increase by 1. 

Age. Humans reach adulthood in their late teens and 
live less than a century. 

Alignment. Humans tend toward no 
particular alignment. The best and the worst are 
found among them. 

Size. Humans vary widely in height and build, from 
barely 5 feet to well over 6 feet tall. Regardless of your 
position in that range, your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 
Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and one extra language of your choice. Humans typically 
learn the languages of other peoples they deal with, 
including obscure dialects. They are fond of sprinkling 
their speech with words borrowed from other tongues: 
Ore curses. Elvish musical expressions, Dwarvish 
military phrases, and so on. 

^ 

Variant Human Traits 

If your campaign uses the optional feat rules from chapter 5, 
your Dungeon Master might allow these variant traits, all of 
which replace the human’s Ability Score Increase trait. 

Ability Score Increase. Two different ability scores of your 
choice increase by 1. 

Skills. You gain proficiency in one skill of your choice. 

Feat. You gain one feat of your choice. 












% 

/ 



Dragonborn 

Her father stood on the first of the three stairs 
that led down from the portal, unmoving. The scales of his 
face had grown paler around the edges, but Clanless Mehen 
still looked as if he could wrestle down a dire bear him¬ 
self. His familiar well-worn armor was gone, replaced by 
violet-tinted scale armor with bright silvery tracings. There 
was a blazon on his arm as well, the mark of some foreign 
house. The sword at his back was the same, though, the one 
he had carried since even before he had found the twins left 
in swaddling at the gates ofArush Vayem. 


Born of dragons, as their name proclaims, the 
dragonborn walk proudly through a world that greets 
them with fearful incomprehension. Shaped by draconic 
gods or the dragons themselves, dragonborn originally 
hatched from dragon eggs as a unique race, combining 
the best attributes of dragons and humanoids. Some 
dragonborn are faithful servants to true dragons, others 
form the ranks of soldiers in great wars, and still others 
find themselves adrift, with no clear calling in life. 


Proud Dragon Kin 


Dragonborn look very much like dragons standing erect 
in humanoid form, though they lack wings or a tail. The 
first dragonborn had scales of vibrant hues matching 
the colors of their dragon kin, but generations of 
interbreeding have created a more uniform appearance. 
Their small, fine scales are usually brass or bronze 
in color, sometimes ranging to scarlet, rust, gold, or 
copper-green. They are tall and strongly built, often 
standing close to 6 V 2 feet tall and weighing 300 pounds 
or more. Their hands and feet are strong, talonlike 
claws with three fingers and a thumb on each hand. 

The blood of a particular type of dragon runs 
very strong through some dragonborn clans. These 
dragonborn often boast scales that more closely match 
those of their dragon ancestor -bright red, green, blue, 
or white, lustrous black, or gleaming metallic gold, 
silver, brass, copper, or bronze. 


For all her life, Farideh had known that reading her 

father’s face was a skill she'd been fortunate to learn, A 
human who couldn't spot the shift of her eyes or Havilar’s 
would certainly see only the indifference of a dragon in 
Clanless Mehen’s face. But the shift of scales, the arch of a 
ridge, the set of his eyes, the gape of his teeth—her father's 
face spoke volumes. 

But every scale of it, this time, seemed completely still— 
the indifference of a dragon, even to Farideh, 

—Erin M. Evans, The Adversary 





















Self-Sufficient Clans 


Uncommon Races 

The dragonborn and the rest of the races in this chapter are 
uncommon. They don’t exist in every world of DSrD, and 
even where they are found, they are less widespread than 
dwarves, elves, halflings, and humans. 

In the cosmopolitan cities of the D&.D multiverse, most 


To any dragonborn, the clan is more important than 
life itself. Dragonborn owe their devotion and respect 
to their clan above all else, even the gods. Each 
dragonborn’s conduct reflects on the honor of his or her 
clan, and bringing dishonor to the clan can result in 
expulsion and exile. Each dragonborn knows his or her 
station and duties within the clan, and honor demands 
maintaining the bounds of that position. 

A continual drive for self-improvement reflects the 
self-sufficiency of the race as a whole. Dragonborn value 
skill and excellence in all endeavors. They hate to fail, 
and they push themselves to extreme efforts before they 
give up on something. A dragonborn holds mastery of 
a particular skill as a lifetime goal. Members of other 
races who share the same commitment find it easy to 
earn the respect of a dragonborn. 

Though all dragonborn strive to be self-sufficient, 
they recognize that help is sometimes needed in difficult 
situations. But the best source for such help is the 
clan, and when a clan needs help, it turns to another 
dragonborn clan before seeking aid from other races— 
or even from the gods. 

Dragonborn Names 

Dragonborn have personal names given at birth, 
but they put their clan names first as a mark of 
honor. A childhood name or nickname is often used 
among clutchmates as a descriptive term or a term 
of endearment. The name might recall an event or 
center on a habit. 

Male Names: Arjhan, Balasar, Bharash, Donaar, Ghesh, 
Heskan, Kriv, Medrash, Mehen, Nadarr, Pandjed, 
Patrin, Rhogar, Shamash, Shedinn, Tarhun, Torinn 
Female Names: Akra, Biri, Daar, Farideh, Harann, 
Havilar, Jheri, Kava, Korinn, Mishann, Nala, Perra, 
Raiann, Sora, Surina, Thava, Uadjit 



people hardly look twice at members of even the most 
exotic races. But the small towns and villages that dot 
the countryside are different. The common folk aren’t 
accustomed to seeing members of these races, and they 
react accordingly. 

Dragonborn. It’s easy to assume that a dragonborn is a 
monster, especially if his or her scales betray a chromatic 
heritage. Unless the dragonborn starts breathing fire and 
causing destruction, though, people are likely to respond 
with caution rather than outright fear. 

Gnome. Gnomes don’t look like a threat and can quickly 
disarm suspicion with good humor. The common folk are 
often curious about gnomes, likely never having seen one 
before, but they are rarely hostile or fearful. 

Half-Elf. Although many people have never seen a half-elf, 
virtually everyone knows they exist. A half-elf stranger’s 
arrival is followed by gossip behind the half-elf’s back and 
stolen glances across the common room, rather than any 
confrontation or open curiosity. 

Half-Ore. It’s usually safe to assume that a half-ore is 
belligerent and quick to anger, so people watch themselves 
around an unfamiliar half-ore. Shopkeepers might 
surreptitiously hide valuable or fragile goods when a half-ore 
comes in, and people slowly clear out of a tavern, assuming a 
fight will break out soon. 

Tiefing. Half-ores are greeted with a practical caution, but 


tieflings are the subject of supernatural fear. The evil of their 


heritage is plainly visible in their features, and as far as most 


people are concerned, a tiefling could very well be a devil 


straight from the Nine Hells. People might make warding 


signs as a tiefling approaches, cross the street to avoid 


passing near, or bar shop doors before a tiefling can enter. 



















Childhood Names: Climber, Earbender, Leaper, Pious, 
Shieldbiter, Zealous 

Clan Names: Clethtinthiallor, Daardendrian, Delmirev, 
Drachedandion, Fenkenkabradon, Kepeshkmolik, 
Kerrhylon, Kimbatuul, Linxakasendalor, Myastan, 
Nemmonis, Norixius, Ophinshtalajiir, Prexijandilin, 
Shestendeliath, Turnuroth, Verthisathurgiesh, Yarjerit 

Dragonborn Traits 

Your draconic heritage manifests in a variety of traits 
you share with other dragonborn. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2, and your Charisma score increases by 1. 

A^e. Young dragonborn grow quickly. They walk 
hours after hatching, attain the size and development 
of a 10-year-old human child by the age of 3, and reach 
adulthood by 15. They live to be around 80. 

Alignment. Dragonborn tend to extremes, making a 
conscious choice for one side or the other in the cosmic 
war between good and evil (represented by Bahamut 
and Tiamat, respectively). Most dragonborn are good, 
but those who side with Tiamat can be terrible villains. 

Size. Dragonborn are taller and heavier than humans, 
standing well over 6 feet tall and averaging almost 250 
pounds. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 


Draconians 

In the Dragonlance setting, the followers of the evil goddess 
Takhisis learned a dark ritual that let them corrupt the 
eggs of metallic dragons, producing evil dragonborn called 
draconians. Five types of draconians, corresponding to the 
five types of metallic dragons, fought for Takhisis in the War 
of the Lance: auraks (gold), baaz (brass), bozak (bronze), 
kapak (copper), and sivak (silver). In place oftheir draconic 
breath weapons, they have unique magical abilities. 


Draconic Ancestry. You have draconic ancestry. 
Choose one type of dragon from the Draconic Ancestry 
table. Your breath weapon and damage resistance are 
determined by the dragon type, as shown in the table. 

Breath Weapon. You can use your action to exhale 
destructive energy. Your draconic ancestry determines 
the size, shape, and damage type of the exhalation. 

When you use your breath weapon, each creature in 
the area of the exhalation must make a saving throw, 
the type of which is determined by your draconic 
ancestry. The DC for this saving throw equals 8 + 
your Constitution modifier + your proficiency bonus. A 
creature takes 2d6 damage on a failed save, and half 
as much damage on a successful one. The damage 
increases to 3d6 at 6th level, 4d6 at 11th level, and 5d6 
at 16th level. 

After you use your breath weapon, you can’t use it 


Dragon 

1C Ancestry 


Dragon 

Damage Type 

Breath Weapon 

Black 

Acid 

5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 

Blue 

Lightning 

5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 

Brass 

Fire 

5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 

Bronze 

Lightning 

5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 

Copper 

Acid 

5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) 

Cold 

Fire 

15 ft. cone (Dex. save) 

Green 

Poison 

15 ft. cone (Con. save) 

Red 

Fire 

15 ft. cone (Dex. save) 

Silver 

Cold 

15 ft. cone (Con. save) 

White 

Cold h 

15 ft. cone (Con. save) 


again until you complete a short or long rest. 

Damage Resistance. You have resistance to the 
damage type associated with your draconic ancestry. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Draconic. Draconic is thought to be one of the 
oldest languages and is often used in the study of magic. 
The language sounds harsh to most other creatures and 
includes numerous hard consonants and sibilants. 
























Gnome 


A constant hum of busy activity pervades the warrens 
and neighborhoods where gnomes form their close- 
knit communities. Louder sounds punctuate the hum: 
a crunch of grinding gears here, a minor explosion 
there, a yelp of surprise or triumph, and especially 
bursts of laughter. Gnomes take delight in life, enjoying 
every moment of invention, exploration, investigation, 
creation, and play. 


Vibrant Expression 


A gnome’s energy and enthusiasm for living shines 
through every inch of his or her tiny body. Gnomes 
average slightly over 3 feet tall and weigh 40 to 45 
pounds. Their tan or brown faces are usually adorned 
with broad smiles (beneath their prodigious noses), 
and their bright eyes shine with excitement. Their 


Delighted Dedication 


As far as gnomes are concerned, being alive is a 
wonderful thing, and they squeeze every ounce of 
enjoyment out of their three to five centuries of life. 
Humans might wonder about getting bored over the 
course of such a long life, and elves take plenty of time 
to savor the beauties of the world in their long years, but 
gnomes seem to worry that even with all that time, they 
can’t get in enough of the things they want to do and see. 

Gnomes speak as if they can’t get the thoughts 
out of their heads fast enough. Even as they offer 
ideas and opinions on a range of subjects, they still 
manage to listen carefully to others, adding the 
appropriate exclamations of surprise and appreciation 
along the way. 


Skinny AND flaxen-haired, his skin 
walnut brown and his eyes a startling 
turquoise, Burgell stood half as tall asAeron 
climb up on a stool to look out the peephole. Like most 
itations in Oehle. that particular tenement had been built 
for humans, and smaller residents coped with the resulting 
awkwardness as best they could. 

But at least the relative largeness of the apartment gave 
Burgell room to pack in all his gnome-sized gear. The front 
room was his workshop, and it contained a bewildering 
miscellany of tools: hammers, chisels, saws, lockpicks, 
tinted lenses, jeweler's loupes, and jars of powdered and 
shredded ingredients for casting spells. Afat gray cat. the 
mage’s familiar, lay curled atop a grimoire. It opened its 
eyes. gaveAeron a disdainfulyellow stare, then appeared 
to go back to sleep. 

—Richard Lee Byers, The Black Bouquet 


fair hair has a tendency to stick out in every direction, 
as if expressing the gnome’s insatiable interest in 
everything around. 

A gnome’s personality is writ large in his or her 
appearance. A male gnome’s beard, in contrast to 
his wild hair, is kept carefully trimmed but often 
styled into curious forks or neat points. A gnome’s 
clothing, though usually made in modest earth tones, 
is elaborately decorated with embroidery, embossing, 
or gleaming jewels. 






4 







Deep Gnomes 

A third subrace of gnomes, the deep gnomes (or svirfneblin), 
live in small communities scattered in the Underdark. Unlike 
the duergar and the drew, svirfneblin are as good as their 
surface cousins. However, their humor and enthusiasm 
are dampened by their oppressive environment, and their 
inventive expertise is directed mostly toward stonework. 

,-p 

Male Names: Alston, Alvyn, Boddynock, Brocc, Burgell, 
Dimble, Eldon, Erky, Fonkin, Frug, Gerbo, Gimble, 
Glim, Jebeddo, Kellen, Namfoodle, Orryn, Roondar, 
Seebo, Sindri, Warryn, Wrenn, Zook 
Female Names: Bimpnottin, Breena, Caramip, Carlin, 
Donella, Duvamil, Ella, Ellyjobell, Ellywick, Lilli, 
Loopmottin, Lorilla, Mardnab, Nissa, Nyx, Oda, Orla, 
Roywyn, Shamil, Tana, Waywocket, Zanna 
Clan Names: Beren, Daergel, Folkor, Garrick, Nackle, 
Murnig, Ningel, Raulnor, Scheppen, Timbers, Turen 
Nicknames: Aleslosh, Ashhearth, Badger, Cloak, 
Doublelock, Filchbatter, Fnipper, Ku, Nim, Oneshoe, 
Pock, Sparklegem, Stumbleduck 

Seeing the World 

Curious and impulsive, gnomes might take up 
adventuring as a way to see the world or for the love 
of exploring. As lovers of gems and other fine items, 
some gnomes take to adventuring as a quick, if 
dangerous, path to wealth. Regardless of what spurs 
them to adventure, gnomes who adopt this way of life 
eke as much enjoyment out of it as they do out of any 
other activity they undertake, sometimes to the great 
annoyance of their adventuring companions. 

Gnome Traits 

Your gnome character has certain characteristics in 
common with all other gnomes. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score 
increases by 2. 

Age. Gnomes mature at the same rate humans do, and 
most are expected to settle down into an adult life by 
around age 40. They can live 350 to almost 500 years. 

Alignment. Gnomes are most often good. Those who 
tend toward law are sages, engineers, researchers, 
scholars, investigators, or inventors. Those who tend 
toward chaos are minstrels, tricksters, wanderers, 
or fanciful jewelers. Gnomes are good-hearted, and 


% • y 


Though gnomes love jokes of all kinds, particularly 
puns and pranks, they’re just as dedicated to the more 
serious tasks they undertake. Many gnomes are skilled 
engineers, alchemists, tinkers, and inventors. They’re 
willing to make mistakes and laugh at themselves in 
the process of perfecting what they do, taking bold 
(sometimes foolhardy) risks and dreaming large. 

Bright Burrows 

Gnomes make their homes in hilly, wooded lands. They 
live underground but get more fresh air than dwarves 
do, enjoying the natural, living world on the surface 
whenever they can. Their homes are well hidden by 
both clever construction and simple illusions. Welcome 
visitors are quickly ushered into the bright, warm 
burrows. Those who are not welcome are unlikely to 
find the burrows in the first place. 

Gnomes who settle in human lands are commonly 
gemeutters, engineers, sages, or tinkers. Some human 
families retain gnome tutors, ensuring that their pupils 
enjoy a mix of serious learning and delighted enjoyment. 
A gnome might tutor several generations of a single 
human family over the course of his or her long life. 

Gnome Names 

Gnomes love names, and most have half a dozen or so. 

A gnome’s mother, father, clan elder, aunts, and uncles 
each give the gnome a name, and various nicknames 
from just about everyone else might or might not stick 
over time. Gnome names are typically variants on the 
names of ancestors or distant relatives, though some 
are purely new inventions. When dealing with humans 
and others who are “stuffy” about names, a gnome 
learns to use no more than three names: a personal 
name, a clan name, and a nickname, choosing the one in 
each category that’s the most fun to say. 





















Always Appreciative 

It’s rare for a gnome to be hostile or malicious unless he 
or she has suffered a grievous injury. Gnomes know that 
most races don’t share their sense of humor, but they enjoy 
anyone's company just as they enjoy everything else they set 
out to do. 


even the tricksters among them are more playful 
than vicious. 

Size. Gnomes are between 3 and 4 feet tall and 
average about 40 pounds. Your size is Small. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet. 

Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you have 
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You can 
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright 
light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You can’t 
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Gnome Cunning. You have advantage on all 
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws 
against magic. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Gnomish. The Gnomish language, which uses the 
Dwarvish script, is renowned for its technical treatises 
and its catalogs of knowledge about the natural world. 

Subrace. Two subraces of gnomes are found among 
the worlds of D&D: forest gnomes and rock gnomes. 
Choose one of these subraces. 


Forest Gnome 

As a forest gnome, you have a natural knack for illusion 
and inherent quickness and stealth. In the worlds of 
D&D, forest gnomes are rare and secretive. They gather 
in hidden communities in sylvan forests, using illusions 
and trickery to conceal themselves from threats or 
to mask their escape should they be detected. Forest 
gnomes tend to be friendly with other good-spirited 
woodland folk, and they regard elves and good fey as 
their most important allies. These gnomes also befriend 
small forest animals and rely on them for information 
about threats that might prowl their lands. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score 
increases by 1. 

Natural Illusionist. You know the minor illusion 
cantrip. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for it. 

Speak with Small Beasts. Through sounds and 
gestures, you can communicate simple ideas with Small 
or smaller beasts. Forest gnomes love animals and often 
keep squirrels, badgers, rabbits, moles, woodpeckers, 
and other creatures as beloved pets. 


Rock Gnome 

As a rock gnome, you have a natural inventiveness and 
hardiness beyond that of other gnomes. Most gnomes 
in the worlds of D&D are rock gnomes, including the 
tinker gnomes of the Dragonlance setting. 




Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score 
increases by 1. 

Artificer’s Lore. Whenever you make an Intelligence 
(History) check related to magic items, alchemical 
objects, or technological devices, you can add twice your 
proficiency bonus, instead of any proficiency bonus you 
normally apply. 

Tinker. You have proficiency with artisan’s tools 
(tinker’s tools). Using those tools, you can spend 1 
hour and 10 gp worth of materials to construct a Tiny 
clockwork device (AC 5, 1 hp). The device ceases 
to function after 24 hours (unless you spend 1 hour 
repairing it to keep the device functioning), or when 
you use your action to dismantle it; at that time, you can 
reclaim the materials used to create it. You can have up 
to three such devices active at a time. 

When you create a device, choose one of the 
following options: 


Clockwork Toy. This toy is a clockwork animal, monster, 
or person, such as a frog, mouse, bird, dragon, or 
soldier. When placed on the ground, the toy moves 
5 feet across the ground on each of your turns in a 
random direction. It makes noises as appropriate 
to the creature it represents. ^ 

Fire Starter. The device produces a miniature 
flame, which you can use to light a candle, 
torch, or campfire. Using the device SUnf 

requires your action. 

Music Box. When opened, this music box 
plays a single song at a moderate volume. 

The box stops playing when it jL 

reaches the song’s end or 
when it is closed. 












“Tanis?” said Flint hesitantly as the man neared. 

"The same.” The newcomer’s bearded face split in a wide 
grin. He held open his arms and. before the dwarf could 
stop him, engulfed Flint in a hug that lifted him off the 
ground. The dwarf clasped his old friend close for a brief 
instant, then, remembering his dignity, squirmed and freed 
himself from the half-elf’s embrace. 

—Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman, 
Dragons of Autumn Twilight 


Half-Elf 

Flint squinted into the setting sun. He thought 
he saw the figure of a man striding up the path. Standing, 
Flint drew back into the shadow of a tall pine to see better. 
The man’s walk was marked by an easy grace—an elvish 
grace, Flint would have said;yet the man’s body had the 
thickness and tight muscles of a human, while the facial 
hair was definitely humankind’s. All the dwarf could see 
of the man's face beneath a green hood was tan skin and a 
brownish-red beard. Alongbow was slung over one shoulder 
and a sword hung at his leftside. He was dressed in soft 
leather, carefully tooled in the intricate designs the elves 
loved. But no elf in the world ofKrynn could grow a beard 
... no elf, but... 


Walking in two worlds but truly belonging to neither, 
half-elves combine what some say are the best qualities 
of their elf and human parents: human curiosity, 
inventiveness, and ambition tempered by the refined 
senses, love of nature, and artistic tastes of the elves. 
Some half-elves live among humans, set apart by their 
emotional and physical differences, watching friends 
and loved ones age while time barely touches them. 
Others live with the elves, growing restless as they 
reach adulthood in the timeless elven realms, while 
their peers continue to live as children. Many half-elves, 
unable to fit into either society, choose lives of solitary 
wandering or join with other misfits and outcasts in 
the adventuring life. 

Of Two Worlds 

To humans, half-elves look like elves, and to elves, they 
look human. In height, they’re on par with both parents, 
though they’re neither as slender as elves nor as broad 
as humans. They range from under 5 feet to about 6 feet 
tall, and from 100 to 180 pounds, with men only slightly 
taller and heavier than women. Half-elf men do have 
facial hair, and sometimes grow beards to mask their 
elven ancestry. Half-elven coloration and features lie 
somewhere between their human and elf parents, and 
thus show a variety even more pronounced than that 
found among either race. They tend to have the eyes 
of their elven parents. 











Excellent Ambassadors 

Many half-elves learn at an early age to get along with 
everyone, defusing hostility and finding common ground. 

As a race, they have elven grace without elven aloofness and 
human energy without human boorishness. They often make 
excellent ambassadors and go-betweens (except between 
elves and humans, since each side suspects the half-elf 
of favoring the other). 


creative expression, demonstrating neither love 
of leaders nor desire for followers. They chafe at 
rules, resent others’ demands, and sometimes prove 
unreliable, or at least unpredictable. 

Size. Half-elves are about the same size as humans, 
ranging from 5 to 6 feet tall. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. Thanks to your elf blood, you have 
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You can 
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright 
light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You can’t 
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed, and magic can’t put you to sleep. 

Skill Versatility. You gain proficiency in two skills 
of your choice. 

Lan^ua^es. You can speak, read, and write Common, 
Elvish, and one extra language of your choice. 


Diplomats or Wanderers 


Half-elves have no lands of their own, though they are 
welcome in human cities and somewhat less welcome 
in elven forests. In large cities in regions where elves 
and humans interact often, half-elves are sometimes 
numerous enough to form small communities of their 
own. They enjoy the company of other half-elves, the 
only people who truly understand what it is to live 
between these two worlds. 

In most parts of the world, though, half-elves are 
uncommon enough that one might live for years 
without meeting another. Some half-elves prefer to 
avoid company altogether, wandering the wilds as 
trappers, foresters, hunters, or adventurers and visiting 
civilization only rarely. Like elves, they are driven by 
the wanderlust that comes of their longevity. Others, 
in contrast, throw themselves into the thick of society, 
putting their charisma and social skills to great use 
in diplomatic roles or as swindlers. 


Half-Elf Names 


Half-elves use either human or elven naming 
conventions. As if to emphasize that they don’t really fit 
in to either society, half-elves raised among humans are 
often given elven names, and those raised among elves 
often take human names. 


Half-Elf Traits 


Your half-elf character has some qualities in common 
with elves and some that are unique to half-elves. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score 
increases by 2, and two other ability scores of your 
choice increase by 1. 

A^e. Half-elves mature at the same rate humans 
do and reach adulthood around the age of 20. They 
live much longer than humans, however, often 
exceeding 180 years. 

Alignment. Half-elves share the chaotic bent of their 
elven heritage. They value both personal freedom and 


^ ULUi 


1 *!iiJ 

n 4 














Half-Orc 


The warchief Mhurren roused himself from his 


sleeping-furs and his women and pulled a short hauberk 


of heavy steel rings over his thick, well-muscled torso. He 


usually rose before most of his warriors, since he had a 
strong streak of human blood in him, and he found the 
daylight less bothersome than most of his tribe did. Among 
the Bloody Skulls, a warrior was judged by his strength, his 
fierceness, and his wits. Human ancestry was no blemish 
against a warrior—provided he was every bit as strong, 
enduring, and bloodthirsty as his full-blooded kin. Half- 
ores who were weaker than their ore comrades didn't last 
long among the Bloody Skulls or any other ore tribe for 
that matter. But it was often true that a bit of human blood 
gave a warrior just the right mix of cunning, ambition, and 
self-discipline to go far indeed, as Mhurren had. He was 
master of a tribe that could muster two thousand spears, 
and the strongest chief in Thar. 

—Richard Baker, Swordmage 


Whether united under the leadership of a mighty 
warlock or having fought to a standstill after years 
of conflict, ore and human tribes sometimes form 
alliances, joining forces into a larger horde to the terror 
of civilized lands nearby. When these alliances are 
sealed by marriages, half-ores are born. Some half-ores 
rise to become proud chiefs of ore tribes, their human 
blood giving them an edge over their full-blooded ore 
rivals. Some venture into the world to prove their worth 
among humans and other more civilized races. Many of 
these become adventurers, achieving greatness for their 
mighty deeds and notoriety for their barbaric customs 
and savage fury. 

Scarred and Strong 

Half-ores’ grayish pigmentation, sloping foreheads, 
jutting jaws, prominent teeth, and towering builds make 
their orcish heritage plain for all to see. Half-ores stand 
between 6 and 7 feet tall and usually weigh between 
180 and 250 pounds. 

Ores regard battle scars as tokens of pride and 
ornamental scars as things of beauty. Other scars, 
though, mark an ore or half-ore as a former slave or 
a disgraced exile. Any half-ore who has lived among 
or near ores has scars, whether they are marks of 
humiliation or of pride, recounting their past exploits 
and injuries. Such a half-ore living among humans might 
display these scars proudly or hide them in shame. 

The Mark of Gruumsh __ 

The one-eyed god Gruumsh created the ores, and even 
those ores who turn away from his worship can’t fully 
escape his influence. The same is true of half-ores, 
though their human blood moderates the impact of their 
orcish heritage. Some half-ores hear the whispers of 
Gruumsh in their dreams, calling them to unleash the 
rage that simmers within them. Others feel Gruumsh’s 


















Grudging Acceptance 

Each half-ore finds a way to gain acceptance from those who 
hate ores. Some are reserved, trying not to draw attention to 
themselves. A few demonstrate piety and good-heartedness 
as publicly as they can (whether or not such demonstrations 
are genuine). And some simply try to be so tough that others 
just avoid them. 


exultation when they join in melee combat—and either 
exult along with him or shiver with fear and loathing. 
Half-ores are not evil by nature, but evil does lurk within 
them, whether they embrace it or rebel against it. 

Beyond the rage of Gruumsh, half-ores feel emotion 
powerfully. Rage doesn’t just quicken their pulse, it 
makes their bodies burn. An insult stings like acid, 
and sadness saps their strength. But they laugh loudly 
and heartily, and simple bodily pleasures—feasting, 
drinking, wrestling, drumming, and wild dancing—fill 
their hearts with joy. They tend to be short-tempered 
and sometimes sullen, more inclined to action than 
contemplation and to fighting than arguing. The most 
accomplished half-ores are those with enough self- 
control to get by in a civilized land. 


Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score 
increases by 1. 

Age. Half-ores mature a little faster than humans, 
reaching adulthood around age 14. They age 
noticeably faster and rarely live longer than 75 years. 

Alignment. Half-ores inherit a tendency toward chaos 
from their ore parents and are not strongly inclined 
toward good. Half-ores raised among ores and willing 
to live out their lives among them are usually evil 

Size. Half-ores are somewhat larger and bulkier than 
humans, and they range from 5 to well over 6 feet tall. 
Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. Thanks to your ore blood, you have 
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You can 
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright 
light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You can't 
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Menacing. You gain proficiency in the 
Intimidation skill. 

Relentless Endurance. When you are reduced to 
0 hit points but not killed outright, you can drop to 1 hit 
point instead. You can’t use this feature again until you 
finish a long rest. 

Savage Attacks. When you score a critical hit with 
a melee weapon attack, you can roll one of the weapon’s 
damage dice one additional time and add it to the extra 
damage of the critical hit. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and 
write Common and Ore. Ore is a 
harsh, grating language with 
hard consonants. It has 
no script of its own 
but is written in the 

Dwarvish script. ' ^ 


Tribes and Slums 


Half-ores most often live among ores. Of the other races, 
humans are most likely to accept half-ores, and half- 
ores almost always live in human lands when not living 
among ore tribes. Whether proving themselves among 
rough barbarian tribes or scrabbling to survive in the 
slums of larger cities, half-ores get by on their physical 
might, their endurance, and the sheer determination 
they inherit from their human ancestry. 


Half-Orc Names 


Half-ores usually have names appropriate to the culture 
in which they were raised. A half-ore who wants to fit in 
among humans might trade an ore name for a human 
name. Some half-ores with human names decide to 
adopt a guttural ore name because they think it makes 
them more intimidating. 

Male Ore Names: Dench, Feng, Cell, Henk, Holg, Imsh, 
Keth, Krusk, Mhurren, Ront, Shump, Thokk 
Female Ore Names: Baggi, Emen, Engong, Kansif, 
Myev, Neega, Ovak, Ownka, Shautha, Sutha, Vola, 
Volen, Yevelda 


Half-Org Traits 


Your half-ore character has certain traits deriving from 
your ore ancestry. 





that wicked glint in his eyes. “You fight it, don'tyou? Like 
a little wildcat, I wager. Every little jab and comment just 
sharpens your claws.” 

—Erin M. Evans, Brimstone Angels 


To be greeted with stares and whispers, to suffer 
violence and insult on the street, to see mistrust and 
fear in every eye: this is the lot of the tiefling. And to 
twist the knife, tieflings know that this is because a 
pact struck generations ago infused the essence of 
Asmodeus--overlord of the Nine Hells—into their 
bloodline. Their appearance and their nature are not 
their fault but the result of an ancient sin, for which 
they and their children and their children’s children 
will always be held accountable. 


Infernal Bloodline 


“But you do see the way people look at you, 
devil’s child.” 

Those black eyes, cold as a winter storm, were staring 
right into her heart and the sudden seriousness in his 
voice jolted her. 

"What is it they say?” he asked. “One's a curiosity, two’s 
a conspiracy—” 

“Three's a curse,” she finished. “You think I haven't heard 
that rubbish before?" 

“Iknowyou have.” When she glared at him, he added, 
“It’s not as rfl’m plumbing the depths of your mind, dear 
girl. That is the burden of every tiefling. Some break under 
it. some make it the millstone around their neck, some 
revel in it.” He tilted his head again, scrutinizing her, with 


Tieflings are derived from human bloodlines, and in the 
broadest possible sense, they still look human. However, 
their infernal heritage has left a clear imprint on their 
appearance. Tieflings have large horns that take any 
of a variety of shapes: some have curling horns like a 
ram, others have straight and tall horns like a gazelle's, 
and some spiral upward like an antelopes’ horns. They 
have thick tails, four to five feet long, which lash or coil 
around their legs when they get upset or nervous. Their 
canine teeth are sharply pointed, and their eyes are 
solid colors—black, red, white, silver, or gold—with no 
visible sclera or pupil. Their skin tones cover the full 
range of human coloration, but also include various 
shades of red. Their hair, cascading down from behind 
their horns, is usually dark, from black or brown to dark 
red, blue, or purple. 

Self-Reliant AND Suspicious 

Tieflings subsist in small minorities found mostly in 
human cities or towns, often in the roughest quarters 
of those places, where they grow up to be swindlers. 
















thieves, or crime lords. Sometimes they live among 
other minority populations in enclaves where they are 
treated with more respect. 


Mutual Mistrust 

People tend to be suspicious of tieflings, assuming that 
their infernal heritage has left its mark on their personality 
and morality, not just their appearance. Shopkeepers keep 
a close eye on their goods when tieflings enter their stores, 
the town watch might follow a tiefling around for a while, 
and demagogues blame tieflings for strange happenings. 

The reality, though, is that a tiefling’s bloodline doesn’t affect 
his or her personality to any great degree. Years of dealing 
with mistrust does leave its mark on most tieflings, and they 
respond to it in different ways. Some choose to live up to the 
wicked stereotype, but others are virtuous. Most are simply 
very aware of how people respond to them. After dealing with 
this mistrust throughout youth, a tiefling often develops the 
ability to overcome prejudice through charm or intimidation. 


Lacking a homeland, tieflings know that they have 


to make their own way in the world and that they have TiEFLING TrAITS 


to be strong to survive. They are not quick to trust 
anyone who claims to be a friend, but when a tiefling’s 
companions demonstrate that they trust him or her, 
the tiefling learns to extend the same trust to them. 

And once a tiefling gives someone loyalty, the tiefling 
is a firm friend or ally for life. 

Tiefling Names 

Tiefling names fall into three broad categories. Tieflings 
born into another culture typically have names reflective 
of that culture. Some have names derived from the 
Infernal language, passed down through generations, 
that reflect their fiendish heritage. And some younger 
tieflings, striving to find a place in the world, adopt a 
name that signifies a virtue or other concept and then 
try to embody that concept. For some, the chosen name 
is a noble quest. For others, it’s a grim destiny. 


Tieflings share certain racial traits as a result of their 
infernal descent. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score 
increases by 1, and your Charisma score increases by 2. 

Age. Tieflings mature at the same rate as humans but 
live a few years longer. 

Alignment. Tieflings might not have an innate 
tendency toward evil, but many of them end up there. 
Evil or not, an independent nature inclines many 
tieflings toward a chaotic alignment. 

Size. Tieflings are about the same size and build as 
humans. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. Thanks to your infernal heritage, you 
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You 
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were 
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You 


Male Infernal Names: Akmenos, Amnon, Barakas, 
Damakos, Ekemon, lados, Kairon, Leucis, Melech, 
Mordai, Morthos, Pelaios, Skamos, Therai 
Female Infernal Names: Akta, Anakis, Bryseis, Criella, 
Damaia, Ea, Kallista, Lerissa, Makaria, Nemeia, 
Orianna, Phelaia, Rieta 

“Virtue” Names: Art, Carrion, Chant, Creed, Despair, 
Excellence, Fear, Glory, Hope, Ideal, Music, Nowhere, 
Open, Poetry, Quest, Random, Reverence, Sorrow, 
Temerity, Torment, Weary 


can’t discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Hellish Resistance. You have resistance 
to fire damage. 

Infernal Legacy. You know the thaumaturgy cantrip. 
Once you reach 3rd level, you can cast the hellish 
rebuke spell once per day as a 2nd-level spell. Once you 
reach 5th level, you can also cast the darkness spell 
once per day. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for 
these spells. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Infernal. 





Chapter 3: Classes 


^J DVENTURERS ARE EXTRAORDINARY PEOPLE, 

■ ■ driven by a thirst for excitement into a 

life that others would never dare lead. 

M I They are heroes, compelled to explore the 
y dark places of the world and take on the 

W challenges that lesser women and men 
can’t stand against. 

Class is the primary definition of what your character 
can do. It’s more than a profession; it’s your character’s 
calling. Class shapes the way you think about the 
world and interact with it and your relationship with 
other people and powers in the multiverse. A fighter, 
for example, might view the world in pragmatic terms 
of strategy and maneuvering, and see herself as just a 
pawn in a much larger game. A cleric, by contrast, might 
see himself as a willing servant in a god’s unfolding plan 
or a conflict brewing among various deities. While the 
fighter has contacts in a mercenary company or army, 
the cleric might know a number of priests, paladins, and 
devotees who share his faith. 


Your class gives you a variety of special features, such 
as a fighter’s mastery of weapons and armor, and a 
wizard’s spells. At low levels, your class gives you only 
two or three features, but as you advance in level you 
gain more and your existing features often improve. 
Each class entry in this chapter includes a table 
summarizing the benefits you gain at every level, and 
a detailed explanation of each one. 

Adventurers sometimes advance in more than one 
class. A rogue might switch direction in life and swear 
the oath of a paladin. A barbarian might discover latent 
magical ability and dabble in the sorcerer class while 
continuing to advance as a barbarian. Elves are known 
to combine martial mastery with magical training 
and advance as fighters and wizards simultaneously. 
Optional rules for combining classes in this way, called 
multiclassing, appear in chapter 6. 

Twelve classes—listed in the Classes table—are found 
in almost every D&D world and define the spectrum of 
typical adventurers. 


Classes 

Class 

Description 

Hit 

Die 

Primary 

Ability 

Saving Throw 
Proficiencies 

Armor and Weapon 

Proficiencies 

Barbarian 

A fierce warrior of primitive background 
who can enter a battle rage 

dl2 

Strength 

Strength & 
Constitution 

Light and medium armor, shields, 
simple and martial weapons 

Bard 

An inspiring magician whose power 
echoes the music of creation 

d8 

Charisma 

Dexterity &, 
Charisma 

Light armor, simple weapons, hand 
crossbows, longswords, rapiers, 
shortswords 

Cleric 

A priestly champion who wields divine 
magic in service of a higher power 

d8 

Wisdom 

Wisdom & 
Charisma 

Light and medium armor, shields, 
simple weapons 

Druid 

A priest of the Old Faith, wielding the 
powers of nature—moonlight and 
plant growth, fire and lightning—and 
adopting animal forms 

d8 

Wisdom 

Intelligence 
& Wisdom 

Light and medium armor (nonmetal), 
shields (nonmetal), clubs, daggers, 
darts, javelins, maces, quarterstaffs, 
scimitars, sickles, slings, spears 

Fighter 

A master of martial combat, skilled with 
a variety of weapons and armor 

dlO 

Strength or 
Dexterity 

Strength & 
Constitution 

All armor, shields, simple and martial 
weapons 

Monk 

An master of martial arts, harnessing 
the power of the body in pursuit of 
physical and spiritual perfection 

d8 

Dexterity & 
Wisdom 

Strength & 
Dexterity 

Simple weapons, shortswords 

Paladin 

A holy warrior bound to a sacred oath 

dlO 

Strength & 
Charisma 

Wisdom Sc 

Charisma 

All armor, shields, simple and martial 
weapons 

Ranger 

A warrior who uses martial prowess and 
nature magic to combat threats on the 
edges of civilization 

dlO 

Dexterity & 
Wisdom 

Strength & 
Dexterity 

Light and medium armor, shields, 
simple and martial weapons , 

Rogue 

A scoundrel who uses stealth and 
trickery to overcome obstacles and 
enemies 

dS 

Dexterity 

Dexterity & 
Intelligence 

Light armor, simple weapons, hand 
crossbows, longswords, rapiers, 
shortswords 

Sorcerer 

A spellcaster who draws on inherent 
magic from a gift or bloodline 

d6 

Charisma 

Constitution 

Sc Charisma 

Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs, 
light crossbows 

Warlock 

A wielder of magic that is derived from 
a bargain with an extraplanar entity 

d8 

Charisma 

Wisdom &. 

Charisma 

Light armor, simple weapons 

Wizard 

V. 

A scholarly magic-user capable of 
manipulating the structures of reality 

d6 

Intelligence 

Intelligence 
& Wisdom 

Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs, 
light crossbows 











Barbarian 


A tall human tribesman strides through a blizzard, 
draped in fur and hefting his axe. He laughs as he 
charges toward the frost giant who dared poach his 
people’s elk herd. 

A half-ore snarls at the latest challenger to her 
authority over their savage tribe, ready to break his neck 
with her bare hands as she did to the last six rivals. 

Frothing at the mouth, a dwarf slams his helmet into 
the face of his drow foe, then turns to drive his armored 
elbow into the gut of another. 

These barbarians, different as they might be, are 
defined by their rage: unbridled, unquenchable, and 
unthinking fury. More than a mere emotion, their anger 
is the ferocity of a cornered predator, the unrelenting 
assault of a storm, the churning turmoil of the sea. 

For some, their rage springs from a communion 
with fierce animal spirits. Others draw from a roiling 
reservoir of anger at a world full of pain. For every 
barbarian, rage is a power that fuels not just a battle 
frenzy but also uncanny reflexes, resilience, and 
feats of strength. 


Primal Instinct 


People of towns and cities take pride in how their 
civilized ways set them apart from animals, as if 
denying one’s own nature was a mark of superiority. To 
a barbarian, though, civilization is no virtue, but a sign 
of weakness. The strong embrace their animal nature 
keen instincts, primal physicality, and ferocious rage. 
Barbarians are uncomfortable when hedged in by walls 
and crowds. They thrive in the wilds of their homelands: 
the tundra, jungle, or grasslands where their tribes 
live and hunt. 

Barbarians come alive in the chaos of combat. 

They can enter a berserk state where rage takes over, 
giving them superhuman strength and resilience. A 
barbarian can draw on this reservoir of fury only a few 
times without resting, but those few rages are usually 
sufficient to defeat whatever threats arise. 


A Life of Danger 


Not every member of the tribes deemed “barbarians” 
by scions of civilized society has the barbarian class. A 
true barbarian among these people is as uncommon as 
a skilled fighter in a town, and he or she plays a similar 
role as a protector of the people and a leader in times 
of war. Life in the wild places of the world is fraught 
with peril: rival tribes, deadly weather, and terrifying 






















The Barbarian 


Level 

Proficiency 

Bonus 

Features 

Rages 

Rage 

Damagi 

1st 

-1-2 

Rage, Unarmored 
Defense 

2 

+2 

2nd 

+2 

Reckless Attack, 
Danger Sense 

2 

+2 

3rd 

+2 

Primal Path 

3 

+2 

4th 

+2 

Ability Score 
Improvement 

3 

+2 

5th 

■r3 

Extra Attack, 

3 

+2 



Fast Movement 



6th 

■f3 

Path feature 

4 

+2 

7th 

+3 

Feral Instinct 

4 

+2 

8th 

+^ 

Ability Score 
Improvement 

4 

+2 

9th 

-t4 

Brutal Critical 
(1 die) 

4 

+3 

10th 

-t-4 

Path feature 

4 

+3 

11th 

+A 

Relentless Rage 

4 

+3 

12th 

+4 

Ability Score 
Improvement 

5 

+3 

13 th 

+5 

Brutal Critical 
(2 dice) 

5 

+3 

14th 

+5 

Path feature 

5 

+3 

15th 

-1-5 

Persistent Rage 

5 

-h3 

16th 

-1-5 

Ability Score 
Improvement 

5 

+4 

17th 

+6 

Brutal Critical 
(3 dice) 

6 

+4 

18th 

+6 

Indomitable 

Might 

6 

+4 

19th 

+6 

Ability Score 
Improvement 

6 

+4 

20th 

+6 

Primal Champion 

Unlimited 

-h4 




What led you to take up the adventuring life? Were you 
lured to settled lands by the promise of riches? Did you 
join forces with soldiers of those lands to face a shared 
threat? Did monsters or an invading horde drive you 
out of your homeland, making you a rootless refugee? 
Perhaps you were a prisoner of war, brought in chains to 
“civilized” lands and only now able to win your freedom. 
Or you might have been cast out from your people 
because of a crime you committed, a taboo you violated, 
or a coup that removed you from a position of authority. 

Quick Build 


monsters. Barbarians charge headlong into that danger 
so that their people don't have to. 

Their courage in the face of danger makes barbarians 
perfectly suited for adventuring. Wandering is often a 
way of life for their native tribes, and the rootless life of 
the adventurer is little hardship for a barbarian. Some 
barbarians miss the close-knit family structures of the 
tribe, but eventually find them replaced by the bonds 
formed among the members of their adventuring parties. 

Creating a Barbarian 

When creating a barbarian character, think about where 
your character comes from and his or her place in the 
world. Talk with your DM about an appropriate origin 
for your barbarian. Did you come from a distant land, 
making you a stranger in the area of the campaign? 

Or is the campaign set in a rough-and-tumble frontier 
where barbarians are common? 


You can make a barbarian quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, put your highest ability score in 
Strength, followed by Constitution. Second, choose the 
outlander background. 

Class Features 

As a barbarian, you gain the following class features. 

Hit Points 

Hit Dice: ldl2 per barbarian level 
Hit Points at 1st Level: 12 + your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: ldl2 (or 7) -t- your 
Constitution modifier per barbarian level after 1st 

Proficiencies 

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields 
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons 
Tools: None 

Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution 
Skills: Choose two from Animal Handling, Athletics, 
Intimidation, Nature, Perception, and Survival 





















Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 

• (a) a greataxe or (b) any martial melee weapon 

• (a) two handaxes or (b) any simple weapon 

• An explorer's pack and four javelins 

Rage 

In battle, you fight with primal ferocity. On your turn, 
you can enter a rage as a bonus action. 

While raging, you gain the following benefits if you 
aren’t wearing heavy armor: 

■ You have advantage on Strength checks and Strength 
saving throws. 

• When you make a melee weapon attack using 
Strength, you gain a bonus to the damage roll that 
increases as you gain levels as a barbarian, as shown 
in the Rage Damage column of the Barbarian table. 

• You have resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing damage. 

If you are able to cast spells, you can’t cast them or 
concentrate on them while raging. 

Your rage lasts for 1 minute. It ends early if you are 
knocked unconscious or if your turn ends and you 
haven’t attacked a hostile creature since your last turn 
or taken damage since then. You can also end your rage 
on your turn as a bonus action. 

Once you have raged the number of times shown 
for your barbarian level in the Rages column of the 
Barbarian table, you must finish a long rest before you 
can rage again. 


Unarmored Defense 

While you are not wearing any armor, your Armor Class 
equals 10 + your Dexterity modifier + your Constitution 
modifier. You can use a shield and still gain this benefit. 

Reckless Attack 

Starting at 2nd level, you can throw aside all concern 
for defense to attack with fierce desperation. When 
you make your first attack on your turn, you can decide 
to attack recklessly. Doing so gives you advantage on 
melee weapon attack rolls using Strength during this 
turn, but attack rolls against you have advantage until 
your next turn. 

Danger Sense 

At 2nd level, you gain an uncanny sense of when things 
nearby aren’t as they should be, giving you an edge 
when you dodge away from danger. 

You have advantage on Dexterity saving throws 
against effects that you can see, such as traps and spells. 
To gain this benefit, you can’t be blinded, deafened, or 
incapacitated. 

Primal Path 

At 3rd level, you choose a path that shapes the nature of 
your rage. Choose the Path of the Berserker or the Path 
of the Totem Warrior, both detailed at the end of the 
class description. Your choice grants you features at 3rd 
level and again at 6th, 10th, and 14th levels. 













Ability Score Improvement 

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, 
and 19th level, you can increase one ability score of your 
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of 
your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase an ability 
score above 20 using this feature. 

Extra Attack 

Beginning at 5th level, you can attack twice, instead of 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 

Fast Movement 


barbarians attribute their rage to different sources, 
however. For some, it is an internal reservoir where 
pain, grief, and anger are forged into a fury hard as 
steel. Others see it as a spiritual blessing, a gift of 
a totem animal. 

Path of the Berserker 

For some barbarians, rage is a means to an end—that 
end being violence. The Path of the Berserker is a path 
of untrammeled fury, slick with blood. As you enter 
the berserker’s rage, you thrill in the chaos of battle, 
heedless of your own health or well-being. 


Starting at 5th level, your speed increases by 10 feet 
while you aren’t wearing heavy armor. 

Feral Instinct 

By 7th level, your instincts are so honed that you have 
advantage on initiative rolls. 

Additionally, if you are surprised at the beginning of 
combat and aren’t incapacitated, you can act normally 
on your first turn, but only if you enter your rage before 
doing anything else on that turn. 

Brutal Critical 

Beginning at 9th level, you can roll one additional 
weapon damage die when determining the extra 
damage for a critical hit with a melee attack. 

This increases to two additional dice at 13th level 
and three additional dice at 17th level. 

Relentless Rage 

Starting at 11th level, your rage can keep you fighting 
despite grievous wounds. If you drop to 0 hit points 
while you’re raging and don’t die outright, you can make 
a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. If you succeed, you 
drop to 1 hit point instead. 

Each time you use this feature after the first, the DC 
increases by 5. When you finish a short or long rest, the 
DC resets to 10. 

Persistent Rage 

Beginning at 15th level, your rage is so fierce that 
it ends early only if you fall unconscious or if you 
choose to end it. 

Indomitable Might 

Beginning at 18th level, if your total for a Strength 
check is less than your Strength score, you can use that 
score in place of the total. 

Primal Champion 

At 20th level, you embody the power of the wilds. Your 
Strength and Constitution scores increase by 4. Your 
maximum for those scores is now 24. 

Primal Paths 

Rage burns in every barbarian’s heart, a furnace 
that drives him or her toward greatness. Different 


Frenzy 

Starting when you choose this path at 3rd level, you 
can go into a frenzy when you rage. If you do so, for 
the duration of your rage you can make a single melee 
weapon attack as a bonus action on each of your turns 
after this one. When your rage ends, you suffer one level 
of exhaustion (as described in appendix A). 


Mindless Rage 

Beginning at 6th level, you can’t be charmed or 
frightened while raging. If you are charmed or 
frightened when you enter your rage, the effect is 
suspended for the duration of the rage. 


Intimidating Presence 


Beginning at 10th level, you can use your action to 
frighten someone with your menacing presence. 

When you do so, choose one creature that you can see 
within 30 feet of you. If the creature can see or hear 
you, it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw (DC 
equal to 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Charisma 
modifier) or be frightened of you until the end of your 
next turn. On subsequent turns, you can use your action 
to extend the duration of this effect on the frightened 




creature until the end of your next turn. This effect ends 
if the creature ends its turn out of line of sight or more 
than 60 feet away from you. 

If the creature succeeds on its saving throw, you can't 
use this feature on that creature again for 24 hours. 

Retaliation 

Starting at 14th level, when you take damage from 
a creature that is within 5 feet of you. you can use 
your reaction to make a melee weapon attack against 
that creature. 


Path of the Totem Warrior 

The Path of the Totem Warrior is a spiritual journey, as 
the barbarian accepts a spirit animal as guide, protector, 
and inspiration. In battle, your totem spirit fills you 
with supernatural might, adding magical fuel to your 
barbarian rage. 

Most barbarian tribes consider a totem animal to be 
kin to a particular clan. In such cases, it is unusual for 
an individual to have more than one totem animal spirit, 
though exceptions exist. 

Spirit Seeker 

Yours is a path that seeks attunement with the natural 
world, giving you a kinship with beasts. At 3rd level when 
you adopt this path, you gain the ability to cast the beast 
sense and speak with animals spells, but only as rituals, 
as described in chapter 10. 

Totem Spirit 

At 3rd level, when you adopt this path, you choose a 
totem spirit and gain its feature. You must make or 
acquire a physical totem object- an amulet or similar 
adornment--that incorporates fur or feathers, claws, 
teeth, or bones of the. totem animal. At your option, you 
also gain minor physical attributes that are reminiscent 
of your totem .spirit. For example, if you have a bear 
totem spirit, you might be unusually hairy and thick- 
skinned. or if your totem is the eagle, your eyes turn 
bright yellow. 


Your totem animal might be an animal related to those 
listed here but more appropriate to your homeland. 

For example, you could choose a hawk or vulture in 
place of an eagle. 

Bear, While raging, you have resistance to all damage 
except psychic damage. The spirit of the bear makes you 
tough enough to stand up to any punishment. 

Ea^le. While you're raging and aren’t wearing 
heavy armor, other creatures have disadvantage on 
opportunity attack rolls against you, and you can use the 
Dash action as a bonus action on your turn. The spirit 
of the eagle makes you into a predator who can weave 
through the fray with ease. 

Wolf, While you’re raging, your friends have 
advantage on melee attack rolls against any creature 
within 5 feet of you that is hostile to you. The spirit of 
the wolf makes you a leader of hunters. 

Aspect of the Beast 

At 6th level, you gain a magical benefit based on the 
totem animal of your choice. You can choose the same 
animal you selected at 3rd level or a different one. 

Bear, You gain the might of a bear. Your carrying 
capacity (including maximum load and maximum lift) 
is doubled, and you have, advantage on Strength checks 
made to push, pull, lift, or break objects. 

Eagle. You gain the eyesight of an eagle. You can 
see up to 1 mile away with no difficulty, able to discern 
even fine details as though looking at something no 
more than 100 feet away from you. Additionally, dim 
light doesn’t impose disadvantage on your Wisdom 
(Perception) checks. 

Wolf. You gain the hunting sensibilities of a wolf. You 
can track other creatures while traveling at a fast pace, 
and you can move stealthily while traveling at a normal 
pace (see chapter 8 for rules on travel pace). 

Spirit Walker 

At lOth level, you can cast the commune with nature 
spell, but only as a ritual. When you do so, a spiritual 
%’ersion of one of the animals you chose for Totem Spirit 
or Aspect of the Beast appears to you to convey the 
information you seek. 

Totemic Attunement 

.4t 14th level, you gain a magical benefit based on a 
totem animal of your choice. You can choose the same 
animal you selected previously or a different one. 

Bear, While you’re raging, any creature, within 5 feet 
of you that’s hostile to you has disadvantage on attack 
rolls against targets other than you or another character 
with this feature. An enemy is immune to this effect if it 
can’t see or hear you or if it can’t be frightened. 

Eagle. While raging, you have a flying speed equal to 
your current walking speed. This benefit works only in 
short bursts: you fall if you end your turn in the air and 
nothing else is holding you aloft. 

Wolf, While you’re raging, you can use a bonus action 
on your turn to knock a Large or smaller creature prone 
when you hit it with melee weapon attack. 















Bard 


Humming as she traces her fingers over an ancient 
monument in a long-forgotten ruin, a half-elf in rugged 
leathers finds knowledge springing into her mind, 
conjured forth by the magic of her song—knowledge 
of the people who constructed the monument and the 
mythic saga it depicts. 

A stern human warrior bangs his sword rhythmically 
against his scale mail, setting the tempo for his war chant 
and exhorting his companions to bravery and heroism. 
The magic of his song fortifies and emboldens them. 

Laughing as she tunes her cittern, a gnome weaves 
her subtle magic over the assembled nobles, ensuring 
that her companions’ words will be well received. 

Whether scholar, skald, or scoundrel, a bard weaves 
magic through words and music to inspire allies, 
demoralize foes, manipulate minds, create 
illusions, and even heal wounds. 


Hti j, 'r 




A 


Music and Magic 


Learning from Experience 


In the worlds of D&D, words and music are 
not just vibrations of air, but vocalizations with 
power all their own. The bard is a master of song, 
speech, and the magic they contain. Bards say 
that the multiverse was spoken into existence, that the 
words of the gods gave it shape, and that echoes of these 
primordial Words of Creation still resound throughout 
the cosmos. The music of bards is an attempt to snatch 
and harness those echoes, subtly woven into their 
spells and powers. 

The greatest strength of bards is their sheer 
versatility. Many bards prefer to stick to the sidelines 
in combat, using their magic to inspire their allies and 
hinder their foes from a distance. But bards are capable 
of defending themselves in melee if necessary, using 
their magic to bolster their swords and armor. Their 
spells lean toward charms and illusions rather than 
blatantly destructive spells. They have a wide-ranging 
knowledge of many subjects and a natural aptitude 
that lets them do almost anything well. Bards become 
masters of the talents they set their minds to perfecting, 
from musical performance to esoteric knowledge. 


True bards are not common in the world. Not every 
minstrel singing in a tavern or jester cavorting in a royal 
court is a bard. Discovering the magic hidden in music 
requires hard study and some measure of natural talent 
that most troubadours and jongleurs lack. It can be hard 
to spot the difference between these performers and true 
bards, though. A bard’s life is spent wandering across 
the land gathering lore, telling stories, and living on the 
gratitude of audiences, much like any other entertainer. 
But a depth of knowledge, a level of musical skill, and a 
touch of magic set bards apart from their fellows. 

Only rarely do bards settle in one place for long, and 
their natural desire to travel—to find new tales to tell, 
new skills to learn, and new discoveries beyond the 
horizon—makes an adventuring career a natural calling. 
Every adventure is an opportunity to learn, practice a 
variety of skills, enter long-forgotten tombs, discover lost 










Quick Build 

You can make a bard quickly by 
following these suggestions. First, 

Charisma should be your highest 
ability score, followed by Dexterity. 

Second, choose the entertainer 
background. Third, choose the dancing lights and 
vicious mockery cantrips, along with the following 
Ist-level spells: charm person, detect ma^ic, healing 
word, and thunderwave. 


Class Features 


As a bard, you gain the following class features. 


Hit Points 

Hit Dice: ld8 per bard level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: ld8 (or 5) + your 
Constitution modifier per bard level after 1st 


Proficiencies 

Armor: Light armor 

Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows, 
longswords, rapiers, shortswords 
Tools: Three musical instruments of your choice 


Saving Throws: Dexterity, Charisma 
Skills: Choose any three 


Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 


• (a) a rapier, (b) a longsword, or (c) any simple weapon 

• (a) a diplomat’s pack or (b) an entertainer's pack 

• (a) a lute or (b) any other musical instrument 

• Leather armor and a dagger 


Spellcasting 


You have learned to untangle and reshape the fabric of 
reality in harmony with your wishes and music. Your 
spells are part of your vast repertoire, magic that you 
can tune to different situations. See chapter 10 for the 
general rules of spellcasting and chapter 11 for the 
bard spell list. 


Cantrips 

You know two cantrips of your choice from the bard 
spell list. You learn additional bard cantrips of your 
choice at higher levels, as shown in the Cantrips Known 
column of the Bard table. 


works of magic, decipher old tomes, travel to strange 
places, or encounter exotic creatures. Bards love to 
accompany heroes to witness their deeds firsthand. A 
bard who can tell an awe-inspiring story from personal 
experience earns renown among other bards. Indeed, 
after telling so many stories about heroes accomplishing 
mighty deeds, many bards take these themes to heart 
and assume heroic roles themselves. 

Creating a Bard 

Bards thrive on stories, whether those stories are true 
or not. Your character’s background and motivations 
are not as important as the stories that he or she tells 
about them. Perhaps you had a secure and mundane 
childhood. There’s no good story to be told about that, 
so you might paint yourself as an orphan raised by a hag 
in a dismal swamp. Or your childhood might be worthy 
of a story. Some bards acquire their magical music 
through extraordinary means, including the inspiration 
of fey or other supernatural creatures. 

Did you serve an apprenticeship, studying under a 
master, following the more experienced bard until you 
were ready to strike out on your own? Or did you attend 
a college where you studied bardic lore and practiced 
your musical magic? Perhaps you were a young runaway 
or orphan, befriended by a wandering bard who became 
your mentor. Or you might have been a spoiled noble 
child tutored by a master. Perhaps you stumbled into the 
clutches of a hag, making a bargain for a musical gift in 
addition to your life and freedom, but at what cost? 















The Bard 


Level 

Proficiency 

Bonus 

Features 

Cantrips 

Known 

Spells 

Known 

1st 

2nd 

—Spell Slots per Spell Level— 

3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 

8th 

9th 

1st 

+2 

Spellcasting, Bardic Inspiration (d6) 

2 

4 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

2nd 

-1-2 

Jack of All Trades, Song of Rest {d6) 

2 

5 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

3rd 

+2 

Bard College, Expertise 

2 

6 

4 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

4th 

+2 

Ability Score Improvement 

3 

7 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

5th 

-r3 

Bardic Inspiration (d8), 

Font of Inspiration 

3 

8 

4 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

6th 

-r3 

Countercharm, Bard College feature 

3 

9 

4 

3 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

7th 

4-3 

— 

3 

10 

4 

3 

3 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

8th 

+l 

Ability Score Improvement 

3 

n 

4 

3 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

9th 


Song of Rest {d8) 

3 

12 

4 

3 

3 

3 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

10th 

4-4 

Bardic Inspiration (dlO), Expertise, 
Magical Secrets 

4 

14 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

— 

— 



nth 

+4 

— 

4 

15 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

— 

— 

— 

12th 

4-4 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

15 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

— 

— 

— 

13th 

4-5 

Song of Rest (dlO) 

4 

16 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

— 

— 

14th 

4-5 

Magical Secrets, 

Bard College feature 

4 

18 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 



15th 

+5 

Bardic Inspiration (dl2) 

4 

19 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

— 

16th 

4-5 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

19 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

— 

17th 


Song of Rest (dl2) 

4 

20 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

18th 

i6 

Magical Secrets 

4 

22 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

19 th 

+6 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

22 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

20th 

4-6 

Superior Inspiration 

4 

22 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

2 

1 

1 




Spell Slots 

The Bard table shows how many spell slots you have to 
cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of 
these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level 
or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you 
finish a long rest. 

For example, if you know the Ist-level spell cure 
wounds and have a Ist-level and a 2nd-level spell slot 
available, you can cast cure wounds using either slot. 

Spells Known of 1st Level and Higher 

You know four Ist-level spells of your choice from the 
bard spell list. 

The Spells Known column of the Bard table shows 
when you learn more bard spells of your choice. Each of 
these spells must be of a level for which you have spell 
slots, as shown on the table. For instance, when you 
reach 3rd level in this class, you can learn one new spell 
of 1st or 2nd level. 

Additionally, when you gain a level in this class, you 
can choose one of the bard spells you know and replace 
it with another spell from the bard spell list, which also 
must be of a level for which you have spell slots. 

Spellcasting Ability 

Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your bard 
spells. Your magic comes from the heart and soul you 
pour into the performance of your music or oration. 

You use your Charisma whenever a spell refers to your 
spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your Charisma 


modifier when setting the saving throw DC for a bard 
spell you cast and when making an attack roll with one. 

Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + 
your Charisma modifier 

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus -i- 
your Charisma modifier 

Ritual Casting 

You can cast any bard spell you know as a ritual if that 
spell has the ritual tag. 

Spellcasting Focus 

You can use a musical instrument (found in chapter 5) 
as a spellcasting focus for your bard spells. 

Bardic Inspiration 

You can inspire others through stirring words or music. 
To do so, you use a bonus action on your turn to choose 
one creature other than yourself within 60 feet of you 
who can hear you. That creature gains one Bardic 
Inspiration die, a d6. 

Once within the next 10 minutes, the creature can roll 
the die and add the number rolled to one ability check, 
attack roll, or saving throw it makes. The creature can 
wait until after it rolls the d20 before deciding to use the 
Bardic Inspiration die, but must decide before the DM 
says whether the roll succeeds or fails. Once the Bardic 
Inspiration die is rolled, it is lost. A creature can have 
only one Bardic Inspiration die at a time. 


















You can use this feature a number of times equal 
to your Charisma modifier (a minimum of once). You 
regain any expended uses when you finish a long rest. 

Your Bardic Inspiration die changes when you reach 
certain levels in this class. The die becomes a d8 at 5th 
level, a dlO at 10th level, and a dl2 at 15th level. 

Jack of All Trades 

Starting at 2nd level, you can add half your proficiency 
bonus, rounded down, to any ability check you make that 
doesn’t already include your proficiency bonus. 

Song of Rest 

Beginning at 2nd level, you can use soothing music or 
oration to help revitalize your wounded allies during 
a short rest. If you or any friendly creatures who can 
hear your performance regain hit points at the end of 
the short rest, each of those creatures regains an extra 
ld6 hit points. 

The extra hit points increase when you reach certain 
levels in this class: to IdS at 9th level, to IdlO at 13th 
level, and to ldl2 at 17th level. 

Bard College 

At 3rd level, you delve into the advanced techniques of 
a bard college of your choice: the College of Lore or the 
College of Valor, both detailed at the end of the class 
description. Your choice grants you features at 3rd level 
and again at 6th and 14th level. 

Expertise 

At 3rd level, choose two of your skill proficiencies. Your 
proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check you 
make that uses either of the chosen proficiencies. 

At 10th level, you can choose another two skill 
proficiencies to gain this benefit. 

Ability Score Improvement 

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, 
and 19th level, you can increase one ability score of your 
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of 
your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase an ability 
score above 20 using this feature. 

Font of Inspiration 

Beginning when you reach 5th level, you regain all of 
your expended uses of Bardic Inspiration when you 
finish a short or long rest. 

COUNTERCHARM 

At 6th level, you gain the ability to use musical notes or 
words of power to disrupt mind-influencing effects. As 
an action, you can start a performance that lasts until 
the end of your next turn. During that time, you and any 
friendly creatures within 30 feet of you have advantage 
on saving throws against being frightened or charmed. 

A creature must be able to hear you to gain this benefit. 
The performance ends early if you are incapacitated or 
silenced or if you voluntarily end it (no action required). 


Magical Secrets 

By 10th level, you have plundered magical knowledge 
from a wide spectrum of disciplines. Choose two spells 
from any class, including this one. A spell you choose 
must be of a level you can cast, as shown on the Bard 
table, or a cantrip. 

The chosen spells count as bard spells for you and are 
included in the number in the Spells Known column of 
the Bard table. 

You learn two additional spells from any class at 14th 
level and again at 18th level. 

Superior Inspiration 

At 20th level, when you roll initiative and have no uses 
of Bardic Inspiration left, you regain one use. 

Bard Colleges 

The way of a bard is gregarious. Bards seek each 
other out to swap songs and stories, boast of their 
accomplishments, and share their knowledge. Bards 
form loose associations, which they call colleges, to 
facilitate their gatherings and preserve their traditions. 

College of Lore 

Bards of the College of Lore know something about 
most things, collecting bits of knowledge from sources 
as diverse as scholarly tomes and peasant tales. 
Whether singing folk ballads in taverns or elaborate 
compositions in royal courts, these bards use their gifts 
to hold audiences spellbound. When the applause dies 
down, the audience members might find themselves 
questioning everything they held to be true, from their 
faith in the priesthood of the local temple to their 
loyalty to the king. 

The loyalty of these bards lies in the pursuit of beauty 
and truth, not in fealty to a monarch or following the 
tenets of a deity. A noble who keeps such a bard as a 
herald or advisor knows that the bard would rather be 
honest than politic. 

The college’s members gather in libraries and 
sometimes in actual colleges, complete with classrooms 
and dormitories, to share their lore with one another. 
They also meet at festivals or affairs of state, where they 
can expose corruption, unravel lies, and poke fun at self- 
important figures of authority. 

Bonus Proficiencies 

When you join the College of Lore at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency with three skills of your choice. 

Cutting Words 

Also at 3rd level, you learn how to use your wit to 
distract, confuse, and otherwise sap the confidence and 
competence of others. When a creature that you can 
see within 60 feet of you makes an attack roll, an ability 
check, or a damage roll, you can use your reaction to 
expend one of your uses of Bardic Inspiration, rolling 
a Bardic Inspiration die and subtracting the number 
rolled from the creature’s roll. You can choose to use 
this feature after the creature makes its roll, but before 
the DM determines whether the attack roll or ability 







check succeeds or fails, or before the creature deals its 
damage. The creature is immune if it can’t hear you or if 
it’s immune to being charmed. 

Additional Magical Secrets 

At 6th level, you learn two spells of your choice from any 
class. A spell you choose must be of a level you can cast, 
as shown on the Bard table, or a cantrip. The chosen 
spells count as bard spells for you but don't count 
against the number of bard spells you know. 

Peerless Skill 

Starting at 14th level, when you make an ability check, 
you can expend one use of Bardic Inspiration. Roll a 
Bardic Inspiration die and add the number rolled to 
your ability check. You can choose to do so after you roll 
the die for the ability check, but before the DM tells you 
whether you succeed or fail. 

College of Valor 

Bards of the College of Valor are daring skalds whose 
tales keep alive the memory of the great heroes of the 
past, and thereby inspire a new generation of heroes. 
These bards gather in mead halls or around great 
bonfires to sing the deeds of the mighty, both past 
and present. They travel the land to witness great 
events firsthand and to ensure that the memory of 
those events doesn’t pass from the world. With their 


songs, they inspire others to reach the same heights of 
accomplishment as the heroes of old. 

Bonus Proficiencies 

When you join the College of Valor at 3rd level, you 
gain proficiency with medium armor, shields, and 
martial weapons. 

Combat Inspiration 

Also at 3rd level, you learn to inspire others in battle. 

A creature that has a Bardic Inspiration die from you 
can roll that die and add the number rolled to a weapon 
damage roll it just made. Alternatively, when an attack 
roll IS made against the creature, it can use its reaction 
to roll the Bardic Inspiration die and add the number 
rolled to its AC against that attack, after seeing the roll 
but before knowing whether it hits or misses. 

Extra Attack 

Starting at 6th level, you can attack twice, instead of 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 

Battle Magic 

At I4th level, you have mastered the art of weaving 
spellcasting and weapon use into a single harmonious 
act. When you use your action to cast a bard spell, you 
can make one weapon attack as a bonus action. 










Cleric 


Arms and eyes upraised toward the sun and a prayer 
on his lips, an elf begins to glow with an inner light that 
spills out to heal his battle-worn companions. 

Chanting a song of glory, a dwarf swings his axe 
in wide swaths to cut through the ranks of ores 
arrayed against him, shouting praise to the gods with 
every foe’s fall. 

Calling down a curse upon the forces of undeath, a 
human lifts her holy symbol as light pours from it to 
drive back the zombies crowding in on her companions. 

Clerics are intermediaries between the mortal world 
and the distant planes of the gods. As varied as the gods 
they serve, clerics strive to embody the handiwork of 
their deities. No ordinary priest, a cleric is imbued with 
divine magic. 


Healers and Warriors 


Divine magic, as the name suggests, is the power of 
the gods, flowing from them into the world. Clerics are 
conduits for that power, manifesting it as miraculous 
effects. The gods don't grant this power to everyone who 
seeks it, but only to those chosen to fulfill a high calling. 

Harnessing divine magic doesn’t rely on study or 
training. A cleric might learn formulaic prayers and 
ancient rites, but the ability to cast cleric spells relies on 
devotion and an intuitive sense of a deity’s wishes. 

Clerics combine the helpful magic of healing and 
inspiring their allies with spells that harm and hinder 
foes. They can provoke awe and dread, lay curses of 
plague or poison, and even call down flames from heaven 
to consume their enemies. For those evildoers who will 
benefit most from a mace to the head, clerics depend on 
their combat training to let them wade into melee with 
the power of the gods on their side. 


Divine Agents 


Not every acolyte or officiant at a temple or shrine is a 
cleric. Some priests are called to a simple life of temple 
service, carrying out their gods’ will through prayer and 
sacrifice, not by magic and strength of arms. In some 
cities, priesthood amounts to a political office, viewed 
as a stepping stone to higher positions of authority and 
involving no communion with a god at all. True clerics 
are rare in most hierarchies. 

When a cleric takes up an adventuring life, it is usually 
because his or her god demands it. Pursuing the goals 
of the gods often involves braving dangers beyond the 
walls of civilization, smiting evil or seeking holy relics in 
ancient tombs. Many clerics are also expected to protect 



















The Cleric 


Level 

Proficiency 

Bonus 

Features 

Cantrips 

Known 

1st 

2nd 

—Spell Slots per Spell Level— 

3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 

8th 

9th 

1st 

+2 

Spellcasting, Divine Domain 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

2nd 

+2 

Channel Divinity (1/rest), 

Divine Domain feature 

3 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

3rd 

+2 

— 

3 

4 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

4th 

+2 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

5th 

+3 

Destroy Undead (CR 1/2) 

4 

4 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

6th 

+3 

Channel Divinity (2/rest), 

Divine Domain feature 

4 

4 

3 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

7th 

+3 

— 

4 

4 

3 

3 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

8th 

+3 

Ability Score Improvement, Destroy Undead 
(CR 1), Divine Domain feature 

4 

4 

3 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

9th 

+4 

— 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

10th 

+4 

Divine Intervention 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

nth 

+4 

Destroy Undead (CR 2) 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

— 

— 

— 

12th 

+4 

Ability Score Improvement 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

— 

— 

— 

13th 

+5 

— 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

— 

— 

14th 

+5 

Destroy Undead (CR 3) 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

— 

— 

15th 

+5 

— 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

— 

16th 

+5 

Ability Score Improvement 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

— 

17th 

+6 

Destroy Undead (CR 4), 

Divine Domain feature 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

18th 

+6 

Channel Divinity (3/rest) 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

19th 

+6 

Ability Score Improvement 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

20th 

+6 

Divine Intervention improvement 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

2 

1 

1 



their deities’ worshipers, which can mean fighting 
rampaging ores, negotiating peace between warring 
nations, or sealing a portal that would allow a demon 
prince to enter the world. 

Most adventuring clerics maintain some connection to 
established temples and orders of their faiths. A temple 
might ask for a cleric’s aid, or a high priest might be in a 
position to demand it. 

Creating a Cleric 

As you create a cleric, the most important question to 
consider is which deity to serve and what principles you 
want your character to embody. Appendix B includes 
lists of many of the gods of the multiverse. Check with 
your DM to learn which deities are in your campaign. 

Once you’ve chosen a deity, consider your cleric’s 
relationship to that god. Did you enter this service 
willingly? Or did the god choose you, impelling you into 
service with no regard for your wishes? How do the 
temple priests of your faith regard you: as a champion 
or a troublemaker? What are your ultimate goals? Does 
your deity have a special task in mind for you? Or are 
you striving to prove yourself worthy of a great quest? 

Quick Build 

You can make a cleric quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, Wisdom should be your highest 
ability score, followed by Strength or Constitution. 
Second, choose the acolyte background. 


Glass Features 

As a cleric, you gain the following class features. 

Hit Points 

Hit Dice: ld8 per cleric level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: ld8 (or 5) + your 
Constitution modifier per cleric level after 1st 

Proficiencies 

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields 
Weapons: All simple weapons 
Tools: None 

Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma 
Skills: Choose two from History, Insight, Medicine, 
Persuasion, and Religion 

Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 

• (a) a mace or (6) a warhammer (if proficient) 

• (a) scale mail, (b) leather armor, or (c) chain mail (if 
proficient) 

• (a) a light crossbow and 20 bolts or (b) any simple 
weapon 

• (a) a priest’s pack or (b) an explorer’s pack 

• A shield and a holy symbol 












Spellcasting 

As a conduit for divine power, you can cast cleric spells. 
See chapter 10 for the general rules of spellcasting and 
chapter 11 for the cleric spell list. 

Cantrips 

At 1st level, you know three cantrips of your choice from 
the cleric spell list. You learn additional cleric cantrips 
of your choice at higher levels, as shown in the Cantrips 
Known column of the Cleric table. 

Preparing and Casting Spells 

The Cleric table shows how many spell slots you have 
to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of 
these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level 
or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you 
finish a long rest. 

You prepare the list of cleric spells that are available 
for you to cast, choosing from the cleric spell list. When 
you do so, choose a number of cleric spells equal to 
your Wisdom modifier + your cleric level (minimum of 
one spell). The spells must be of a level for which you 
have spell slots. 

For example, if you are a 3rd-level cleric, you have four 
Ist-level and two 2nd-level spell slots. With a Wisdom 
of 16, your list of prepared spells can include six spells 
of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If you prepare 
the Ist-level spell cure wounds, you can cast it using 
a Ist-level or 2nd-level slot. Casting the spell doesn’t 
remove it from your list of prepared spells. 



You can change your list of prepared spells when you 
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of cleric spells 
requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least 1 
minute per spell level for each spell on your list. 

Spellcasting Ability 

Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your cleric spells. 
The power of your spells comes from your devotion to 
your deity. You use your Wisdom whenever a cleric spell 
refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use 
your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw 
DC for a cleric spell you cast and when making an 
attack roll with one. 

Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + 
your Wisdom modifier 

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + 
your Wisdom modifier 

Ritual Casting 

You can cast a cleric spell as a ritual if that spell has the 
ritual tag and you have the spell prepared. 

Spellcasting Focus 

You can use a holy symbol (found in chapter 5) as a 
spellcasting focus for your cleric spells. 

Divine Domain 

Choose one domain related to your deity; Knowledge, 
Life, Light, Nature, Tempest, Trickery, or War. Each 
domain is detailed at the end of the class description, 
and each one provides examples of gods associated 
with it. Your choice grants you domain spells and other 
features when you choose it at 1st level. It also grants 
you additional ways to use Channel Divinity when you 
gain that feature at 2nd level, and additional benefits at 
6th, 8th, and 17th levels. 

Domain Spells 

Each domain has a list of spells -its domain spells— 
that you gain at the cleric levels noted in the domain 
description. Once you gain a domain spell, you always 
have it prepared, and it doesn’t count against the 
number of spells you can prepare each day. 

If you have a domain spell that doesn’t appear on the 
cleric spell list, the spell is nonetheless a cleric spell for you. 

Channel Divinity 

At 2nd level, you gain the ability to channel divine 
energy directly from your deity, using that energy to fuel 
magical effects. You start with two such effects; Turn 
Dndead and an effect determined by your domain. Some 
domains grant you additional effects as you advance in 
levels, as noted in the domain description. 

When you use your Channel Divinity, you choose 
which effect to create. You must then finish a short or 
long rest to use your Channel Divinity again. 

Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws. 
When you use such an effect from this class, the DC 
equals your cleric spell save DC. 

Beginning at 6th level, you can use your Channel 
Divinity twice between rests, and beginning at 18th level. 

















you can use it three times between rests. When you finish 
a short or long rest, you regain your expended uses. 

Channel Divinity: Turn Undead 
As an action, you present your holy symbol and speak a 
prayer censuring the undead. Each undead that can see 
or hear you within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom 
saving throw. If the creature fails its saving throw, it is 
turned for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. 

A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move 
as far away from you as it can, and it can't willingly 
move to a space within 30 feet of you. It also can’t take 
reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action 
or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from 
moving. If there’s nowhere to move, the creature can use 
the Dodge action. 

Ability Score Improvement 

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, 
and 19th level, you can increase one ability score of your 
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of 
your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase an ability 
score above 20 using this feature. 

Destroy Undead 

Starting at 5th level, when an undead fails its saving 
throw against your Turn Undead feature, the creature is 
instantly destroyed if its challenge rating is at or below a 
certain threshold, as shown in the Destroy Undead table. 


Destroy Undead 


Cleric Level 

Destroys Undead of CR 

5th 

1/2 or lower 

8th 

1 or lower 

11th 

2 or lower 

14th 

3 or lower 

17th 

4 or lower 


Divine Intervention 

Beginning at 10th level, you can call on your deity to 
intervene on your behalf when your need is great. 

Imploring your deity’s aid requires you to use your 
action. Describe the assistance you seek, and roll 
percentile dice. If you roll a number equal to or lower 
than your cleric level, your deity intervenes. The DM 
chooses the nature of the intervention; the effect of any 
cleric spell or cleric domain spell would be appropriate. 

If your deity intervenes, you can’t use this feature 
again for 7 days. Otherwise, you can use it again after 
you finish a long rest. 

At 20th level, your call for intervention succeeds 
automatically, no roll required. 

Divine Domains 

In a pantheon, every deity has influence over different 
aspects of mortal life and civilization, called a deity’s 
domain. All the domains over which a deity has 
influence are called the deity’s portfolio. For example, 
the portfolio of the Greek god Apollo includes the 


domains of Knowledge, Life, and Light. As a cleric, you 
choose one aspect of your deity’s portfolio to emphasize, 
and you are granted powers related to that domain. 

Your choice might correspond to a particular sect 
dedicated to your deity. Apollo, for example, could be 
worshiped in one region as Phoebus (“radiant”) Apollo, 
emphasizing his influence over the Light domain, 
and in a different place as Apollo Acesius (“healing”), 
emphasizing his association with the Life domain. 
Alternatively, your choice of domain could simply be a 
matter of personal preference, the aspect of the deity 
that appeals to you most. 

Each domain’s description gives examples of deities 
who have influence over that domain. Gods are included 
from the worlds of the Forgotten Realms, Greyhawk, 
Dragonlance, and Eberron campaign settings, as well as 
from the Celtic, Greek, Norse, and Egyptian pantheons 
of antiquity. 

Knowledge Domain 

The gods of knowledge—including Oghma, Boccob, 
Gilean, Aureon, and Thoth—value learning and 
understanding above all. Some teach that knowledge is 
to be gathered and shared in libraries and universities, 
or promote the practical knowledge of craft and 
invention. Some deities hoard knowledge and keep its 
secrets to themselves. And some promise their followers 
that they will gain tremendous power if they unlock the 
secrets of the multiverse. Followers of these gods study 
esoteric lore, collect old tomes, delve into the secret 
places of the earth, and learn all they can. Some gods 
of knowledge promote the practical knowledge of craft 
and invention, including smith deities like Gond, Reorx, 
Onatar, Moradin, Hephaestus, and Goibhniu. 


Knowledge Domain Spells 


Cleric Level 

Spells 

1st 

command, identify 

3rd 

augury, suggestion 

5th 

nondetection, speak with dead 

7th 

arcane eye, confusion 

9th 

legend lore, scrying 


Blessings of Knowledge 

At 1st level, you learn two languages of your choice. 

You also become proficient in your choice of two of the 
following skills: Arcana, History, Nature, or Religion. 

Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check 
you make that uses either of those skills. 

Channel Divinity: 

Knowledge of the Ages 

Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to tap into a divine well of knowledge. As an action, 
you choose one skill or tool. For 10 minutes, you have 
proficiency with the chosen skill or tool. 

Channel Divinity: Read Thoughts 
At 6th level, you can use your Channel Divinity to read a 
creature’s thoughts. You can then use your access to the 
creature’s mind to command it. 







As an action, choose one creature that you can see 
within 60 feet of you. That creature must make a 
Wisdom saving throw. If the creature succeeds on the 
saving throw, you can’t use this feature on it again until 
you finish a long rest. 

If the creature fails its save, you can read its surface 
thoughts (those foremost in its mind, reflecting its 
current emotions and what it is actively thinking 
about) when it is within 60 feet of you. This effect lasts 
for 1 minute. 

During that time, you can use your action to end this 
effect and cast the su^^estion spell on the creature 
without expending a spell slot. The target automatically 
fails its saving throw against the spell. 

Potent Spellcasting 

Starting at 8th level, you add your Wisdom modifier to 
the damage you deal with any cleric cantrip. 

Visions of the Past 

Starting at 17th level, you can call up visions of the 
past that relate to an object you hold or your immediate 
surroundings. You spend at least 1 minute in meditation 
and prayer, then receive dreamlike, shadowy glimpses 
of recent events. You can meditate in this way for a 
number of minutes equal to your Wisdom score and 
must maintain concentration during that time, as if you 
were casting a spell. 

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 

Object Reading. Holding an object as you meditate, 
you can see visions of the object’s previous owner. 

After meditating for 1 minute, you learn how the owner 
acquired and lost the object, as well as the most recent 
significant event involving the object and that owner. 

If the object was owned by another creature in the 
recent past (within a number of days equal to your 
Wisdom score), you can spend 1 additional minute 
for each owner to learn the same information about 
that creature. 

Area Reading. As you meditate, you see visions 
of recent events in your immediate vicinity (a room, 
street, tunnel, clearing, or the like, up to a 50-foot cube), 
going back a number of days equal to your Wisdom 
score. For each minute you meditate, you learn about 
one significant event, beginning with the most recent. 
Significant events typically involve powerful emotions, 
such as battles and betrayals, marriages and murders, 
births and funerals. However, they might also include 
more mundane events that are nevertheless important 
in your current situation. 

Life Domain 

The Life domain focuses on the vibrant positive 
energy—one of the fundamental forces of the universe— 
that sustains all life. The gods of life promote vitality 
and health through healing the sick and wounded, 
caring for those in need, and driving away the forces of 
death and undeath. Almost any non-evil deity can claim 
influence over this domain, particularly agricultural 
deities (such as Chauntea, Arawai, and Demeter), sun 
gods (such as Lathander, Pelor, and Re-Horakhty), gods 


of healing or endurance (such as Ilmater, Mishakal, 
Apollo, and Diancecht), and gods of home and 
community (such as Hestia, Hathor, and Boldrei). 


Life Domain Spells 


Cleric Level 

Spells 

1st 

bless, cure wounds 

3rd 

lesser restoration, spiritual weapon 

5th 

beacon of hope, revivify 

7th 

death ward, guardian of faith 

9th 

mass cure wounds, raise dead 


Bonus Proficiency 

When you choose this domain at 1st level, you gain 
proficiency with heavy armor. 

Disciple of Life 

Also starting at 1st level, your healing spells are more 
effective. Whenever you use a spell of 1st level or higher 
to restore hit points to a creature, the creature regains 
additional hit points equal to 2 + the spell's level. 

Channel Divinity: Preserve Life 
Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to heal the badly injured. 

As an action, you present your holy symbol and 
evoke healing energy that can restore a number of hit 
points equal to five times your cleric level. Choose any 
creatures within 30 feet of you, and divide those hit 
points among them. This feature can restore a creature 
to no more than half of its hit point maximum. You can’t 
use this feature on an undead or a construct. 

Blessed Healer 

Beginning at 6th level, the healing spells you cast on 
others heal you as well. When you cast a spell of 1st 
level or higher that restores hit points to a creature 
other than you, you regain hit points equal to 2 + the 
spell’s level. 

Divine Strike 

At 8th level, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon 
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns 
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can 
cause the attack to deal an extra ld8 radiant damage to 
the target. When you reach 14th level, the extra damage 
increases to 2d8. 

Supreme Healing 

Starting at 17th level, when you would normally roll 
one or more dice to restore hit points with a spell,■'you 
instead use the highest number possible for each die. 
For example, instead of restoring 2d6 hit points to a 
creature, you restore 12. 

Light Domain 

Gods of light—including Helm, Lathander, Pholtus, 
Branchala, the Silver Flame, Belenus, Apollo, and 
Re-Horakhty—promote the ideals of rebirth and 
renewal, truth, vigilance, and beauty, often using the 
symbol of the sun. Some of these gods are portrayed 
as the sun itself or as a charioteer who guides the sun 














across the sky. Others are tireless sentinels whose eyes 
pierce every shadow and see through every deception. 
Some are deities of beauty and artistry, who teach that 
art is a vehicle for the soul's improvement. Clerics of a 
god of light are enlightened souls infused with radiance 
and the power of their gods’ discerning vision, charged 
with chasing away lies and burning away darkness. 


burning hands, faerie fire 
flaming sphere, scorching ray 
daylight, fireball 
guardian of faith, wall of fire 
flame strike, scrying 


Bonus Cantrip 

When you choose this domain at 1st level, you gain the 
li^ht cantrip if you don’t already know it. 

Warding Flare 

Also at 1st level, you can interpose divine light between 
yourself and an attacking enemy. When you are attacked 
by a creature within 30 feet of you that you can see, 
you can use your reaction to impose disadvantage on 
the attack roll, causing light to flare before the attacker 
before it hits or misses. An attacker that can’t be blinded 
is immune to this feature. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). You regain 
all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 

Channel Divinity: Radiance of the Dawn 

Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to harness sunlight, banishing darkness and dealing 
radiant damage to your foes. 

As an action, you present your holy symbol, and any 
magical darkness within 30 feet of you is dispelled. 
Additionally, each hostile creature within 30 feet of 
you must make a Constitution saving throw. A creature 
takes radiant damage equal to 2dl0 + your cleric level 
on a failed saving throw, and half as much damage on a 
successful one. A creature that has total cover from you 
is not affected. 


Nature Domain 


Gods of nature are as varied as the natural world 
itself, from inscrutable gods of the deep forests (such 
as Silvanus, Obad-Hai, Chislev, Balinor, and Pan) to 
friendly deities associated with particular springs and 
groves (such as Eldath). Druids revere nature as a 
whole and might serve one of these deities, practicing 
mysterious rites and reciting all-but-forgotten prayers in 
their own secret tongue. But many of these gods have 
clerics as well, champions who take a more active role 
in advancing the interests of a particular nature god. 
These clerics might hunt the evil monstrosities that 
despoil the woodlands, bless the harvest of the faithful, 
or wither the crops of those who anger their gods. 


Improved Flare 

Starting at 6th level, you can also use your Warding 
Flare feature when a creature that you can see within 
30 feet of you attacks a creature other than you. 


Nature Domain Spells 

Cleric Level Spells 

1st animal friendship, speak with animals 

3rd barkskin, spike growth 

5th plant growth, wind wall 

7th dominate beast, grasping vine 

9th insect plague, tree stride 


Potent Spellcasting 

Starting at 8th level, you add your Wisdom modifier to 
the damage you deal with any cleric cantrip. 


Corona of Light 

Starting at 17th level, you can use your action to activate 
an aura of sunlight that lasts for 1 minute or until you 
dismiss it using another action. You emit bright light in 
a 60-foot radius and dim light 30 feet beyond that. Your 
enemies in the bright light have disadvantage on saving 
throws against any spell that deals fire or radiant damage. 


I 




Acolyte of Nature 

At 1st level, you learn one druid cantrip of your choice. 
You also gain proficiency in one of the following skills of 
your choice: Animal Handling, Nature, or Survival. 

Bonus Proficiency 

Also at 1st level, you gain proficiency with heavy armor. 

Channel Divinity: Charm Animals 
AND Plants 

Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to charm animals and plants. 

As an action, you present your holy symbol and invoke 
the name of your deity. Each beast or plant creature that 
can see you within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom 
saving throw. If the creature fails its saving throw, it is 
charmed by you for 1 minute or until it takes damage. 
While it is charmed by you, it is friendly to you and other 
creatures you designate. 

Dampen Elements 

Starting at 6th level, when you or a creature within 30 
feet of you takes acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder 
damage, you can use your reaction to grant resistance to 
the creature against that instance of the damage. 

Divine Strike 

At 8th level, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon 
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns 
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you 
can cause the attack to deal an extra ld8 cold, fire, or 
lightning damage (your choice) to the target. When you 
reach Nth level, the extra damage increases to 2d8. 

Master of Nature 

At 17th level, you gain the ability to command animals 
and plant creatures. While creatures are charmed by 
your Charm Animals and Plants feature, you can take 
a bonus action on your turn to verbally command what 
each of those creatures will do on its next turn. 

Tempest Domain 

Gods whose portfolios include the Tempest domain- 
including Talos, Umberlee, Kord, Zeboim, the 
Devourer, Zeus, and Thor—govern storms, sea, and 
sky. They include gods of lightning and thunder, gods 
of earthquakes, some fire gods, and certain gods of 
violence, physical strength, and courage. In some 
pantheons, a god of this domain rules over other deities 
and is known for swift justice delivered by thunderbolts. 
In the pantheons of seafaring people, gods of this 
domain are ocean deities and the patrons of sailors. 
Tempest gods send their clerics to inspire fear in the 
common folk, either to keep those folk on the path of 



righteousness or to encourage them to offer sacrifices of 
propitiation to ward off divine wrath. 

Tempest Domain Spells 

Cleric Level Spells 

1st fog cloud, thunderwave 

3rd gust of wind, shatter 

Sth call lightning, sleet storm 
7th control water, ice storm 

9th destructive wave, insect plague 

Bonus Proficiencies 

At 1st level, you gain proficiency with martial weapons 
and heavy armor. 

Wrath of the Storm 

Also at 1st level, you can thunderously rebuke attackers. 
When a creature within 5 feet of you that you can see 
hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to 
cause the creature to make a Dexterity saving throw. 

The creature takes 2d8 lightning or thunder damage 
(your choice) on a failed saving throw, and half as much 
damage on a successful one. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). You regain 
all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 

Channel Divinity: Destructive Wrath 
Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to wield the power of the storm with unchecked ferocity. 

When you roll lightning or thunder damage, you can 
use your Channel Divinity to deal maximum damage, 
instead of rolling. 

Thunderbolt Strike 

At 6th level, when you deal lightning damage to a Large 
or smaller creature, you can also push it up to 10 feet 
away from you. 

Divine Strike 

At Sth level, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon 
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns 
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can 
cause the attack to deal an extra ld8 thunder damage to 
the target. When you reach 14th level, the extra damage 
increases to 2d8. 

Stormborn 

At 17th level, you have a flying speed equal to 
your current walking speed whenever you are not 
underground or indoors. 

Trickery Domain 

Gods of trickery—such as Tymora, Beshaba, 
Olidammara, the Traveler, Garl Glittergold, and 
Loki—are mischief-makers and instigators who stand 
as a constant challenge to the accepted order among 
both gods and mortals. They’re patrons of thieves, 
scoundrels, gamblers, rebels, and liberators. Their 
clerics are a disruptive force in the world, puncturing 
pride, mocking tyrants, stealing from the rich, freeing 
captives, and flouting hollow traditions. They prefer 













subterfuge, pranks, deception, and theft rather than 
direct confrontation. 

Trickery Domain Spells 

Cleric Level Spells 

1st charm person, disguise self 

3rd mirror image, pass without trace 

5th blink, dispel magic 

7th dimension door, polymorph 

9th dominate person, modify memory 

Blessing of the Trickster 
Starting when you choose this domain at 1st level, you 
can use your action to touch a willing creature other 
than yourself to give it advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) 
checks. This blessing lasts for 1 hour or until you use 
this feature again. 

Channel Divinity: Invoke Duplicity 

Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to create an illusory duplicate of yourself. 

As an action, you create a perfect illusion of 
yourself that lasts for 1 minute, or until you lose your 
concentration (as if you were concentrating on a spell). 
The illusion appears in an unoccupied space that you 
can see within 30 feet of you. As a bonus action on your 
turn, you can move the illusion up to 30 feet to a space 
you can see, but it must remain within 120 feet of you. 

For the duration, you can cast spells as though you 
were in the illusion’s space, but you must use your own 
senses. Additionally, when both you and your illusion 
are within 5 feet of a creature that can see the illusion, 
you have advantage on attack rolls against that creature, 
given how distracting the illusion is to the target. 

Channel Divinity; Cloak of Shadows 

Starting at 6th level, you can use your Channel 
Divinity to vanish. 

As an action, you become invisible until the end of your 
next turn. You become visible if you attack or cast a spell. 

Divine Strike 

At 8th level, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon 
strikes with poison—a gift from your deity. Once on each 
of your turns when you hit a creature with a weapon 
attack, you can cause the attack to deal an extra ld8 
poison damage to the target. When you reach 14th level, 
the extra damage increases to 2d8. 


watch over warriors and reward them for their great 
deeds. The clerics of such gods excel in battle, inspiring 
others to fight the good fight or offering acts of violence 
as prayers. Gods of war include champions of honor 
and chivalry (such as Torm, Heironeous, and Kiri- 
Jolith) as well as gods of destruction and pillage (such 
as Erythnul, the Fury, Gruumsh, and Ares) and gods of 
conquest and domination (such as Bane, Hextor, and 
Maglubiyet). Other war gods (such as Tempus, Nike, 
and Nuada) take a more neutral stance, promoting war 
in all its manifestations and supporting warriors in any 
circumstance. 


War Domain Spells 


Cleric Level 
1st 
3rd 
5th 
7th 
9th 


Spells 

divine favor, shield of faith 
magic weapon, spiritual weapon 
crusader's mantle, spirit guardians 
freedom of movement, stoneskin 
flame strike, hold monster 


Bonus Proficiencies 

At 1st level, you gain proficiency with martial weapons 
and heavy armor. 


War Priest 

From 1st level, your god delivers bolts of inspiration to 
you while you are engaged in battle. When you use the 
Attack action, you can make one weapon attack as a 
bonus action. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). You regain 
all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 

Channel Divinity; Guided Strike 
Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to strike with supernatural accuracy. When you make 
an attack roll, you can use your Channel Divinity to gain 
a +10 bonus to the roll. You make this choice after you 
see the roll, but before the DM says whether the attack 
hits or misses. 


Channel Divinity: War God’s Blessing 
At 6th level, when a creature within 30 feet of you 
makes an attack roll, you can use your reaction to grant 
that creature a +10 bonus to the roll, using your Channel 
Divinity. You make this choice after you see the roll, but 
before the DM says whether the attack hits or misses. 


Improved Duplicity 

At 17th level, you can create up to four duplicates 
of yourself, instead of one, when you use Invoke 
Duplicity. As a bonus action on your turn, you can 
move any number of them up to 30 feet, to a maximum 
range of 120 feet. 

War Domain 

War has many manifestations. It can make heroes of 
ordinary people. It can be desperate and horrific, with 
acts of cruelty and cowardice eclipsing instances of 
excellence and courage. In either case, the gods of war 


Divine Strike 

At 8th level, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon 
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns 
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can 
cause the attack to deal an extra ld8 damage of the 
same type dealt by the weapon to the target. When you 
reach 14th level, the extra damage increases to 2d8. 

Avatar of Battle 

At 17th level, you gain resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing damage from nonmagical weapons. 








Druid 


Holding high a gnarled staff wreathed with holly, an elf 
summons the fury of the storm and calls down explosive 
bolts of lightning to smite the torch-carrying ores who 
threaten her forest. 

Crouching out of sight on a high tree branch in the 
form of a leopard, a human peers out of the jungle at the 
strange construction of a temple of Evil Elemental Air, 
keeping a close eye on the cultists’ activities. 

Swinging a hlade formed of pure fire, a half-elf 
charges into a mass of skeletal soldiers, sundering 
the unnatural magic that gives the foul creatures the 
mocking semblance of life. 

Whether calling on the elemental forces of nature or 
emulating the creatures of the animal world, druids are 
an embodiment of nature's resilience, cunning, and fury. 
They claim no mastery over nature. Instead, they see 
themselves as extensions of nature’s indomitable will. 


Power of Nature 


Druids revere nature above all, gaining their spells and 
other magical powers either from the force of nature 
itself or from a nature deity. Many druids pursue a 
mystic spirituality of transcendent union with nature 
rather than devotion to a divine entity, while others 
serve gods of wild nature, animals, or elemental forces. 
The ancient druidic traditions are sometimes called 
the Old Faith, in contrast to the worship of gods in 
temples and shrines. 

Druid spells are oriented toward nature and animals— 
the power of tooth and claw, of sun and moon, of fire 
and storm. Druids also gain the ability to take on animal 
forms, and some druids make a particular study of this 
practice, even to the point where they prefer animal 
form to their natural form. 


Preserve the Balance 


For druids, nature exists in a precarious balance. The 
four elements that make up a world—air, earth, fire. 


4 

















I 


[The Druid 


Proficiency 

Bonus 


Features 


Cantrips 

Known 


—Spell Slots per Spell Level— 

1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 


+2 

Druidic, Spellcasting 

2 

2 

+2 

Wild Shape, Druid Circle 

2 

3 

+2 

— 

2 

4 2 — — — — — — — 


Wild Shape improvement, 
Ability Score Improvement 


5th 

+3 

— 

3 

4 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

6th 

+3 

Druid Circle feature 

3 

4 

3 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

7th 

+3 

— 

3 

4 

3 

3 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

8th 

+3 

Wild Shape improvement. 

Ability Score Improvement 

3 

4 

3 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

9th 

+4 

— 

3 

4 

3 

3 

3 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

10th 

+4 

Druid Circle feature 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

11th 

+4 

— 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

— 

— 

— 

12th 

+4 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

— 

— 

— 

13th 

+5 

— 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

— 

— 

14th 

+5 

Druid Circle feature 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

— 

— 

15th 

+5 

— 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

— 

16th 

+5 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

— 

17th 

+6 

— 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

18th 

+6 

Timeless Body, Beast Spells 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

19th 

+6 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

20th 

^- 

+6 

Archdruid 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

2 

1 

1 


and water—must remain in equilibrium. If one element 
were to gain power over the others, the world could be 
destroyed, drawn into one of the elemental planes and 
broken apart into its component elements. Thus, druids 
oppose cults of Elemental Evil and others who promote 
one element to the exclusion of others. 

Druids are also concerned with the delicate ecological 
balance that sustains plant and animal life, and the need 
for civilized folk to live in harmony with nature, not in 
opposition to it. Druids accept that which is cruel in 
nature, and they hate that which is unnatural, including 
aberrations (such as beholders and mind flayers) 
and undead (such as zombies and vampires). Druids 
sometimes lead raids against such creatures, especially 
when the monsters encroach on the druids’ territory. 

Druids are often found guarding sacred sites or 
watching over regions of unspoiled nature. But when a 
significant danger arises, threatening nature’s balance 
or the lands they protect, druids take on a more active 
role in combating the threat, as adventurers. 

Creating a Druid 

When making a druid, consider why your character has 
such a close bond with nature. Perhaps your character 
lives in a society where the Old Faith still thrives, or was 
raised by a druid after being abandoned in the depths 
of a forest. Perhaps your character had a dramatic 
encounter with the spirits of nature, coming face to 
face with a giant eagle or dire wolf and surviving the 
experience. Maybe your character was born during an 
epic storm or a volcanic eruption, which was interpreted 


as a sign that becoming a druid 

was part of your character’s destiny. J 

Have you always been an adventurer J 

as part of your druidic calling, or did you J 

first spend time as a caretaker of a sacred ^ 

grove or spring? Perhaps your homeland was ^ 

befouled by evil, and you took up an adventuring life in 
hopes of finding a new home or purpose. 

Quick Build 

You can make a druid quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, Wisdom should be your highest 
ability score, followed by Constitution, Second, choose 
the hermit background. 

Glass Features 

As a druid, you gain the following class features. 

Hit Points 

Hit Dice: ld8 per druid level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: ld8 (or 5) + your 
Constitution modifier per druid level after 1st 

Proficiencies 

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields (druids will 
not wear armor or use shields made of metal) 
Weapons: Clubs, daggers, darts, javelins, maces, 
quarterstaffs, scimitars, sickles, slings, spears 
Tools: Herbalism kit 

Saving Throws: Intelligence, Wisdom 














Skills; Choose two from Arcana, Animal 
Handling, Insight, Medicine, Nature, Perception, 
Religion, and Survival 

Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background; 

• (a) a wooden shield or {b) any simple weapon 

• (a) a scimitar or {b) any simple melee weapon 

• Leather armor, an explorer’s pack, and a druidic focus 

Druidic 

You know Druidic, the secret language of druids. You 
can speak the language and use it to leave hidden 
messages. You and others who know this language 
automatically spot such a message. Others spot the 
message’s presence with a successful DC 15 Wisdom 
(Perception) check but can’t decipher it without magic. 

Spellcasting 

Drawing on the divine essence of nature itself, you 
can cast spells to shape that essence to your will. See 
chapter 10 for the general rules of spellcasting and 
chapter 11 for the druid spell list. 

Cantrips 

At 1st level, you know two cantrips of your choice from 
the druid spell list. You learn additional druid cantrips 
of your choice at higher levels, as shown in the Cantrips 
Known column of the Druid table. 

Preparing and Casting Spells 

The Druid table shows how many spell slots you have 
to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of 
these druid spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s 
level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when 
you finish a long rest. 

You prepare the list of druid spells that are available 
for you to cast, choosing from the druid spell list. When 
you do so, choose a number of druid spells equal to 
your Wisdom modifier + your druid level (minimum of 

Sacred Plants and Wood 

A druid holds certain plants to be sacred, particularly alder, 
ash, birch, elder, hazel, holly, juniper, mistletoe, oak, rowan, 
willow, and yew. Druids often use such plants as part of a 
spellcasting focus, incorporating lengths of oak or yew or 
sprigs of mistletoe. 

Similarly, a druid uses such woods to make other objects, 
such as weapons and shields. Yew is associated with death 
and rebirth, so weapon handies for scimitars or sickles might 
be fashioned from it. Ash is associated with life and oak 
with strength. These woods make excellent hafts or whole 
weapons, such as clubs or quarterstaffs, as well as shields. 
Alder is associated with air, and it might be used for thrown 
weapons, such as darts or javelins, 

Druids from regions that lack the plants described here 
have chosen other plants to take on similar uses. For 
instance, a druid of a desert region might value the yucca 
tree and cactus plants. 


one spell). The spells must be of a level for which you 
have spell slots. 

For example, if you are a 3rd-level druid, you have four 
Ist-level and two 2nddevel spell slots. With a Wisdom 
of 16, your list of prepared spells can include six spells 
of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If you prepare 
the Ist-level spell cure wounds, you can cast it using 
a Ist-level or 2nd-level slot. Casting the spell doesn’t 
remove it from your list of prepared spells. 

You can also change your list of prepared spells when 
you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of druid 
spelts requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at 
least 1 minute per spell level for each spell on your list. 

Spellcasting Ability 

Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your druid 
spells, since your magic draws upon your devotion and 
attunement to nature. You use your Wisdom whenever 
a spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, 
you use your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving 
throw DC for a druid spell you cast and when making an 
attack roll with one. 

Spall save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + 
your Wisdom modifier 

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + 
your Wisdom modifier 

Ritual Casting 

You can cast a druid spell as a ritual if that spell has the 
ritual tag and you have the spell prepared. 

Spellcasting Focus 

You can use a druidic focus (found in chapter 5) as a 
spellcasting focus for your druid spells. 

Wi ld Sha pe_ 

Starting at 2nd level, you can use your action to 
magically assume the shape of a beast that you have 
seen before. You can use this feature twice. You regain 
expended uses when you finish a short or long rest. 

Your druid level determines the beasts you can 
transform into, as shown in the Beast Shapes table. At 
2nd level, for example, you can transform into any beast 
that has a challenge rating of 1/4 or lower that doesn’t 
have a flying or swimming speed. 


Beast 

Shapes 



Level 

Max. CR 

Limitations 

Example 

2nd 

1/4 

No flying or swimming speed 

Wolf 

4th 

1/2 

No flying speed 

Crocodile 

8th 

1 

— 

Giant eagi 


You can stay in a beast shape for a number of hours 
equal to half your druid level (rounded down). You then 
revert to your normal form unless you expend another 
use of this feature. You can revert to your normal 
form earlier by using a bonus action on your turn. You 
automatically revert if you fall unconscious, drop to 
0 hit points, or die. 

While you are transformed, the following rules apply: 
















Your game statistics are replaced by the statistics of 
the beast, but you retain your alignment, personality, 
and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. You 
also retain all of your skill and saving throw proficien¬ 
cies, in addition to gaining those of the creature. If 
the creature has the same proficiency as you and the 
bonus in its stat block is higher than yours, use the 
creature’s bonus instead of yours. If the creature has 
any legendary or lair actions, you can’t use them. 
When you transform, you assume the beast’s hit 
points and Hit Dice. When you revert to your normal 
form, you return to the number of hit points you had 
before you transformed. However, if you revert as a 
result of dropping to 0 hit points, any excess damage 


Tim^ess^ody 

Starting at 18th level, the primal magic that you wield 
causes you to age more slowly. For every 10 years that 
pass, your body ages only 1 year. 

Be ast Spells 

Beginning at 18th level, you can cast many of your druid 
spells in any shape you assume using Wild Shape. You 
can perform the somatic and verbal components of a 
druid spell while in a beast shape, but you aren’t able to 
provide material components. 

Arch DRUID 



Druid Circle 


At 2nd level, you choose to 
identify with a circle of druids: 
the Circle of the Land or the Circle of the Moon, both 
detailed at the end of the class description. Your choice 
grants you features at 2nd level and again at 6th, 10th, 
and 14th level. 


Ability Score Improvement 


When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, 
and 19th level, you can increase one ability score of 
your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores 
of your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase an 
ability score above 20 using this feature. 


carries over to your normal form. For example, if you 
take 10 damage in animal form and have only 1 hit 
point left, you revert and take 9 damage. As long as 
the excess damage doesn’t reduce your normal form 
to 0 hit points, you aren’t knocked unconscious. 

• You can’t cast spells, and your ability to speak or 
take any action that requires hands is limited to the 
capabilities of your beast form. Transforming doesn’t 
break your concentration on a spell you’ve already 
cast, however, or prevent you from taking actions that 
are part of a spell, such as call U^htnin^, that you’ve 
already cast. 

• You retain the benefit of any features from your class, 
race, or other source and can use them if the new 
form is physically capable of doing so. However, you 
can’t use any of your special senses, such as darkvi- 
sion, unless your new form also has that sense. 

• You choose whether your equipment falls to the 
ground in your space, merges into your new form, or 
is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as normal, 
but the DM decides whether it is practical for the new 
form to wear a piece of equipment, based on the 
ture’s shape and size. Your equipment doesn’t change 
size or shape to match the new 
form, and any equipment that 
the new form can’t wear 
must either fall to the 
ground or merge with it. 

Equipment that merges 
with the form has no 
effect until you leave 
the form. 


At 20th level, you can use your Wild Shape an unlimited 







Arctic 


Additionally, you can ignore the verbal and somatic 
components of your druid spells, as well as any material 
components that lack a cost and aren't consumed by a 
spell. You gain this benefit in both your normal shape 
and your beast shape from Wild Shape. 

Druid Circles 


Druid Level 

3rd 

5th 

7th 

9th 


Circle Spells 

hold person, spike growth 

sleet storm, slow 

freedom of movement, ice storm 

commune with nature, cone of cold 


Though their organization is invisible to most outsiders, 
druids are part of a society that spans the land, ignoring 
political borders. All druids are nominally members 
of this druidic society, though some individuals are so 
isolated that they have never seen any high-ranking 
members of the society or participated in druidic 
gatherings. Druids recognize each other as brothers and 
sisters. Like creatures of the wilderness, however, druids 
sometimes compete with or even prey on each other. 

At a local scale, druids are organized into circles that 
share certain perspectives on nature, balance, and the 
way of the druid. 

Circle of the Land 

The Circle of the Land is made up of mystics and sages 
who safeguard ancient knowledge and rites through 
a vast oral tradition. These druids meet within sacred 
circles of trees or standing stones to whisper primal 
secrets in Druidic. The circle’s wisest members preside 
as the chief priests of communities that hold to the Old 
Faith and serve as advisors to the rulers of those folk. 

As a member of this circle, your magic is influenced 
by the land where you were initiated into the circle’s 
mysterious rites. 

Bonus Cantrip 

When you choose this circle at 2nd level, you learn one 
additional druid cantrip of your choice. 

Natural Recovery 

Starting at 2nd level, you can regain some of your 
magical energy by sitting in meditation and communing 
with nature. During a short rest, you choose expended 
spell slots to recover. The spelt slots can have a 
combined level that is equal to or less than half your 
druid level (rounded up), and none of the slots can be 
6th level or higher. You can't use this feature again until 
you finish a long rest 

For example, when you are a 4th-level druid, you can 
recover up to two levels worth of spell slots. You can 
recover either a 2nd-level slot or two Ist-level slots. 

Circle Spells 

Your mystical connection to the land infuses you with 
the ability to cast certain spells. At 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 
9th level you gain access to circle spells connected 
to the land where you became a druid. Choose that 
land—arctic, coast, desert, forest, grassland, mountain, 
swamp, or Underdark—and consult the associated 
list of spells. 

Once you gain access to a circle spell, you always have 
it prepared, and it doesn’t count against the number of 
spells you can prepare each day. If you gain access to a 
spell that doesn’t appear on the druid spell list, the spell 
is nonetheless a druid spell for you. 


Coast 

Druid Level 
3rd 
5th 
7th 
9th 

Desert 

Druid Level 
3rd 
5th 
7th 
9th 

Forest 

Druid Level 
3rd 
5th 
7th 
9th 

Grassland 

Druid Level 
3rd 
5th 
7th 
9th 

Mountain 

Druid Level 

3rd 

5th 

7th 

9th 

Swamp 

Druid Level 
3rd 
5th 
7th 
9th 

Underdark 

Druid Level 

3rd 

5th 

7th 

9th 


Circle Spells 

mirror image, misty step 
water breathing, water walk 
control water, freedom of movement 
conjure elemental, scrying 


Circle Spells 

blur, silence 

create food and water, protection from energy 
blight, hallucinatory terrain 
insect plague, wall of stone 


Circle Spells 

barkskin, spider climb 
call lightning, plant growth 
divination, freedom of movement 
commune with nature, tree stride 


Circle Spells 

invisibility, pass without trace 
daylight, haste 

divination, freedom of movement 
dream, insect plague 


Circle Spells 

spider climb, spike growth 
lightning bolt, meld into stone 
stone shape, stoneskin 
passwall, wall of stone 


Circle Spells 

darkness, Melf's acid arrow 
water walk, stinking cloud 
freedom of movement, locate creature 
insect plague, scrying 


Circle Spells 

spider climb, web 
gaseous form, stinking cloud 
greater invisibility, stone shape 
cloudkill, insect plague 













Land’s Stride 

Starting at 6th level, moving through nonmagical 
difficult terrain costs you no extra movement. You can 
also pass through nonmagical plants without being 
slowed by them and without taking damage from them if 
they have thorns, spines, or a similar hazard. 

In addition, you have advantage on saving throws against 
plants that are magically created or manipulated to impede 
movement, such those created by the entangle spell. 

Nature’s Ward 

When you reach 10th level, you can’t be charmed or 
frightened by elementals or fey, and you are immune to 
poison and disease. 


Primal Strike 

Starting at 6th level, your attacks in beast form count as 
magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and 
immunity to nonmagical attacks and damage. 

Elemental Wild Shape 

At 10th level, you can expend two uses of Wild Shape 
at the same time to transform into an air elemental, an 
earth elemental, a fire elemental, or a water elemental. 

Thousand Forms 

By Nth level, you have learned to use magic to alter 
your physical form in more subtle ways. You can cast the 
alter self speW at will. 


Nature’s Sanctuary "“druids and the Cods 

When you reach Nth level, creatures of the natural 
world sense your connection to nature and become 
hesitant to attack you. When a beast or plant creature 
attacks you, that creature must make a Wisdom saving 
throw against your druid spell save DC. On a failed save, 
the creature must choose a different target, or the attack 
automatically misses. On a successful save, the creature 
is immune to this effect for 24 hours. 

The creature is aware of this effect before it makes its 
attack against you. 

Circle of the Moon 

Druids of the Circle of the Moon are fierce guardians 
of the wilds. Their order gathers under the full moon to 
share news and trade warnings. They haunt the deepest 
parts of the wilderness, where they might go for weeks 
on end before crossing paths with another humanoid 
creature, let alone another druid. 

Changeable as the moon, a druid of this circle might 
prowl as a great cat one night, soar over the treetops 
as an eagle the next day, and crash through the 
undergrowth in bear form to drive off a trespassing 
monster. The wild is in the druid’s blood. 

Combat Wild Shape 

When you choose this circle at 2nd level, you gain the 
ability to use Wild Shape on your turn as a bonus action, 
rather than as an action. 

Additionally, while you are transformed by Wild 
Shape, you can use a bonus action to expend one 
spell slot to regain ld8 hit points per level of the spell 
slot expended. 

Circle Forms 

The rites of your circle grant you the ability to transform 
into more dangerous animal forms. Starting at 2nd 
level, you can use your Wild Shape to transform into a 
beast with a challenge rating as high as 1 (you ignore 
the Max. CR column of the Beast Shapes table, but must 
abide by the other limitations there). 

Starting at 6th level, you can transform into a beast 
with a challenge rating as high as your druid level 
divided by 3, rounded down. 



Some druids venerate the forces of nature themselves, but 
most druids are devoted to one of the many nature deities 
worshiped in the multiverse (the lists of gods in appendix 
B include many such deities). The worship of these deities 
is often considered a more ancient tradition than the faiths 
of clerics and urbanized peoples. In fact, in the world of 
Greyhawk, the druidic faith is called the Old Faith, and it 
claims many adherents among farmers, foresters, fishers, 
and others who live closely with nature. This tradition 
includes the worship of Nature as a primal force beyond 
personification, but also encompasses the worship of Beory, 
the Oerth Mother, as well as devotees of Obad-Hai, Ehlonna, 
and Ulaa. 

In the worlds of Greyhawk and the Forgotten Realms, 
druidic circles are not usually connected to the faith of a 
single nature deity. Any given circle in the Forgotten Realms, 
for example, might include druids who revere Silvanus, 
Mielikki, Eldath, Chauntea, or even the harsh Cods of Fury: 
Tales, Malar, Auril, and Umberlee. These nature gods are 
often called the First Circle, the first among the druids, and 
most druids count them all (even the violent ones) as worthy 
of veneration. 

The druids of Eberron hold animistic beliefs completely 
unconnected to the Sovereign Host, the Dark Six, or any of 
the other religions of the world. They believe that every living 
thing and every natural phenomenon—sun, moon, wind, 
fire, and the world itself—has a spirit. Their spells, then, are 
a means to communicate with and command these spirits. 


Different druidic sects, though, hold different philosophies 


about the proper relationship of these spirits to each other 


and to the forces of civilization. The Ashbound, for example 


believe that arcane magic is an abomination against nature. 


the Children of Winter venerate the forces of death, and the 


Gatekeepers preserve ancient traditions meant to protect the 


world from the incursion of aberrations. 




















A human in clanging plate armor holds her shield 
before her as she runs toward the massed goblins. An 
elf behind her, clad in studded leather armor, peppers 
the goblins with arrows loosed from his exquisite 
bow. The half-ore nearby shouts orders, helping 
the two combatants coordinate their assault to the 
best advantage. 

A dwarf in chain mail interposes his shield between 
the ogre’s club and his companion, knocking the deadly 
blow aside. His companion, a half-elf in scale armor, 
swings two scimitars in a blinding whirl as she circles 
the ogre, looking for a blind spot in its defenses. 

A gladiator fights for sport in an arena, a master with 
his trident and net, skilled at toppling foes and moving 
them around for the crowd’s delight —and his own 
tactical advantage. His opponent’s sword flares with 
blue light an instant before she sends lightning flashing 
forth to smite him. 

All of these heroes are fighters, perhaps the most 
diverse class of characters in the worlds of Dungeons & 
Dragons. Questing knights, conquering overlords, royal 
champions, elite foot soldiers, hardened mercenaries, 
and bandit kings—as fighters, they all share an 
unparalleled mastery with weapons and armor, and a 
thorough knowledge of the skills of combat. And they 
are well acquainted with death, both meting it out and 
staring it defiantly in the face. 


Well-Rounded Specialists 


Fighters learn the basics of all combat styles. Every 
fighter can swing an axe, fence with a rapier, wield a 
longsword or a greatsword, use a bow, and even trap foes 
in a net with some degree of skill. Likewise, a fighter is 
adept with shields and every form of armor. Beyond that 
basic degree of familiarity, each fighter specializes in a 
certain style of combat. Some concentrate on archery, 
some on fighting with two weapons at once, and some 
on augmenting their martial skills with magic. This 
combination of broad general ability and extensive 
specialization makes fighters superior combatants 
on battlefields and in dungeons alike. 


Trained for Danger 


Not every member of the city watch, the village militia, 
or the queen’s army is a fighter. Most of these troops are 
relatively untrained soldiers with only the most basic 
combat knowledge. Veteran soldiers, military officers, 
trained bodyguards, dedicated knights, and similar 
figures are fighters. 













"HE Fighter 

Proficiency 
Level Bonus 

1st +2 

Features 

Fighting Style, Second Wind 


2nd 

+2 

Action Surge (one use) 


3rd 

+2 

Martial Archetype 


4th 

+2 

Ability Score Improvement 


5th 

4-3 

Extra Attack 


6th 

4-3 

Ability Score Improvement 


7th 

4-3 

Martial Archetype feature 


8th 

+3 

Ability Score Improvement 


9th 

4-4 

Indomitable (one use) 


10th 

+4 

Martial Archetype feature 


nth 

+4 

Extra Attack (2) 


12th 

4-4 

Ability Score Improvement 


13 th 

4-5 

Indomitable (two uses) 


14th 

4-5 

Ability Score Improvement 


15th 

4-5 

Martial Archetype feature 


16th 

+5 

Ability Score Improvement 


17th 

4-6 

Action Surge (two uses), Indomitable 
(three uses) 

18th 

4-6 

Martial Archetype feature 


19th 

4-6 

Ability Score Improvement 


20th 

4-6 

Extra Attack (3) 






Some fighters feel drawn to use their training as 
adventurers. The dungeon delving, monster slaying, and 
other dangerous work common among adventurers is 
second nature for a fighter, not all that different from 
the life he or she left behind. There are greater risks, 
perhaps, but also much greater rewards—few fighters in 
the city watch have the opportunity to discover a magic 
flame tongue sword, for example. 

Creating a Fighter 

As you build your fighter, think about tv/o related 
elements of your character's background: Where did 
you get your combat training, and what set you apart 
from the mundane warriors around j^ou? Were you 
particularly ruthless? Did you get extra help from a 
mentor, perhaps because of your exceptional dedication? 
What drove you to this training in the first place? A 
threat to your homeland, a thirst for revenge, or a need 
to prove yourself might all have been factors. 

You might have enjoyed formal training in a noble’s 
army or in a local militia. Perhaps you trained in a war 
academy, learning strategy, tactics, and military history. 
Or you might be self-taught—unpolished but well tested. 
Did you take up the sword as a way to escape the limits 
of life on a farm, or are you following a proud family 
tradition? Where did you acquire your weapons and 
armor? They might have been military issue or family 
heirlooms, or perhaps you scrimped and saved for years 


to buy them. Your armaments are now among your 
most important possessions—the only things that stand 
between you and death’s embrace. 

Quick Build 

You can make a fighter quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, make Strength or Dexterity your 
highest ability score, depending on whether you 
want to focus on melee weapons or on archery (or 
finesse weapons). Your next-highest score should be 
Constitution, or Intelligence if you plan to adopt the 
Eldritch Knight martial archetype. Second, choose 
the soldier background. 

Class Features 

As a fighter, you gain the following class features. 

Hit Points 

Hit Dice: IdlO per fighter level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 10 i your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: IdlO (or 6) + your 
Constitution modifier per fighter level after 1st 

Proficiencies 

Armor: All armor, shields 

Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons 

Tools; None 


Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution 












Skills: Choose two skills from Acrobatics, Animal 
Handling, Athletics, History, Insight, Intimidation, 
Perception, and Survival 

Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 

• (a) chain mail or (b) leather, longbow, and 20 arrows 

• (a) a martial weapon and a shield or (b) two martial 
weapons 

• (a) a light crossbow and 20 bolts or (b) two handaxes 

• (a) a dungeoneer’s pack or (b) an explorer’s pack 

Fighting Style 

You adopt a particular style of fighting as your specialty. 
Choose one of the following options. You can’t take a 
Fighting Style option more than once, even if you later 
get to choose again. 

Archery 

You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with 
ranged weapons. 

Defense 

While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to AC. 

Dueling 

When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and 
no other weapons, you gain a 12 bonus to damage rolls 
with that weapon. 

Great Weapon Fighting 

When you roll a 1 or 2 on a damage die for an attack you 
make with a melee weapon that you are wielding with 
two hands, you can reroll the die and must use the new 
roll, even if the new roll is a 1 or a 2. The weapon must 
have the two-handed or versatile property for you to gain 
this benefit. 

Protection 

When a creature you can see attacks a target other 
than you that is within 5 feet of you, you can use your 
reaction to impose disadvantage on the attack roll. You 
must be wielding a shield. 

Two-Weapon Fighting 

When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can add 
your ability modifier to the damage of the second attack. 

Second Wind 

You have a limited well of stamina that you can draw on 
to protect yourself from harm. On your turn, you can use 
a bonus action to regain hit points equal to IdlO + your 
fighter level. 

Once you use this feature, you must finish a short or 
long rest before you can use it again. 

Action Surge 

Starting at 2nd level, you can push yourself beyond your 
normal limits for a moment. On your turn, you can take 
one additional action on top of your regular action and a 
possible bonus action. 


Once you use this feature, you must finish a short or 
long rest before you can use it again. Starting at 17th 
level, you can use it twice before a rest, but only once on 
the same turn. 

Martial Archetype 

At 3rd level, you choose an archetype that you strive to 
emulate in your combat styles and techniques. Choose 
Champion, Battle Master, or Eldritch Knight, all detailed 
at the end of the class description. The archetype you 
choose grants you features at 3rd level and again at 7th, 
10th, 15th, and 18th level. 

Ability Score Improvement 

When you reach 4th level, and again at 6th, 8th, 12th, 
14th, 16th, and 19th level, you can increase one ability 
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability 
scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase 
an ability score above 20 using this feature. 

Extra Attack 

Beginning at 5th level, you can attack twice, instead of 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 

The number of attacks increases to three when you 
reach 11th level in this class and to four when you reach 
20th level in this class. 

Indomitable 

Beginning at 9th level, you can reroll a saving throw that 
you fail. If you do so, you must use the new roll, and you 
can’t use this feature again until you finish a long rest. 

You can use this feature twice between long rests 
starting at 13th level and three times between long rests 
starting at 17th level. 

Martial Archetypes 

Different fighters choose different approaches to 
perfecting their fighting prowess. The martial archetype 
you choose to emulate reflects your approach. 

Champion 

The archetypal Champion focuses on the development 
of raw physical power honed to deadly perfection. 

Those who model themselves on this archetype combine 
rigorous training with physical excellence to deal 
devastating blows. 

Improved Critical 

Beginning when you choose this archetype at 3rd 
level, your weapon attacks score a critical hit on a 
roil of 19 or 20. 

Remarkable Athlete 

Starting at 7th level, you can add half your proficiency 
bonus (round up) to any Strength, Dexterity, or 
Constitution check you make that doesn’t already use 
your proficiency bonus. 

In addition, when you make a running long jump, the 
distance you can cover increases by a number of feet 
equal to your Strength modifier. 
















Additional Fighting Style 

At 10th level, you can choose a second option from the 

Fighting Style class feature. 

Superior Critical 

Starting at 15th level, your weapon attacks score a 
critical hit on a roll of 18-20. 

Survivor 

At 18th level, you attain the pinnacle of resilience in 
battle. At the start of each of your turns, you regain hit 
points equal to 5 + your Constitution modifier if you 
have no more than half of your hit points left. You don’t 
gain this benefit if you have 0 hit points. 

Battle Master 

Those who emulate the archetypal Battle Master 
employ martial techniques passed down through 
generations. To a Battle Master, combat is an academic 
field, sometimes including subjects beyond battle such 
as weaponsmithing and calligraphy. Not every fighter 
absorbs the lessons of history, theory, and artistry 
that are reflected in the Battle Master archetype, but 
those who do are well-rounded fighters of great skill 
and knowledge. 


Combat Superiority 
When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you 
learn maneuvers that are fueled by special dice called 
superiority dice. 

Maneuvers, You learn three maneuvers of your 
choice, which are detailed under “Maneuvers” below. 
Many maneuvers enhance an attack in some way. You 
can use only one maneuver per attack. 

You learn two additional maneuvers of your choice 
at 7th, 10th, and 15th level. Each time you learn new 
maneuvers, you can also replace one maneuver you 
know with a different one. 

Superiority Dice. You have four superiority dice, 
which are d8s. A superiority die is expended when you 
use it. You regain all of your expended superiority dice 
when you finish a short or long rest. 

You gain another superiority die at 7th level and one 
more at 15th level. 

Saving Throws. Some of your maneuvers require 
your target to make a saving throw to resist the 
maneuver’s effects. The saving throw DC is calculated 
as follows: 

Maneuver save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus -i- 
your Strength or Dexterity modifier (your choice) 

Student of War 

At 3rd level, you gain proficiency with one type of 
artisan’s tools of your choice. 


Know Your Enemy 

Starting at 7th level, if you spend at least 1 minute 
observing or interacting with another creature outside 
combat, you can learn certain information about its 
capabilities compared to your own. The DM tells you if 
the creature is your equal, superior, or inferior in regard 
to two of the following characteristics of your choice: 









• Strength score 

• Dexterity score 

• Constitution score 

• Armor Class 

• Current hit points 

• Total class levels (if any) 

• Fighter class levels (if any) 

Improved Combat Superiority 

At 10th level, your superiority dice turn into dlOs. At 

18th level, they turn into dl2s. 

Relentless 

Starting at 15th level, when you roll initiative and 
have no superiority dice remaining, you regain 1 
superiority die. 

Maneuvers 

The maneuvers are presented in alphabetical order. 

Commander’s Strike. When you take the Attack 
action on your turn, you can forgo one of your attacks 
and use a bonus action to direct one of your companions 
to strike. When you do so, choose a friendly creature 
who can see or hear you and expend one superiority die. 
That creature can immediately use its reaction to make 
one weapon attack, adding the superiority die to the 
attack’s damage roll. 

Disarming Attack. When you hit a creature with a 
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to 
attempt to disarm the target, forcing it to drop one item 
of your choice that it’s holding. You add the superiority 
die to the attack’s damage roll, and the target must 
make a Strength saving throw. On a failed save, it drops 
the object you choose. The object lands at its feet. 

Distracting Strike. When you hit a creature with a 
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to 
distract the creature, giving your allies an opening. You 
add the superiority die to the attack’s damage roll. The 
next attack roll against the target by an attacker other 
than you has advantage if the attack is made before the 
start of your next turn. 

Evasive Footwork. When you move, you can expend 
one superiority die, rolling the die and adding the 
number rolled to your AC until you stop moving. 

Feinting Attack. You can expend one superiority die 
and use a bonus action on your turn to feint, choosing 
one creature within 5 feet of you as your target. You 
have advantage on your next attack roll against that 
creature. If that attack hits, add the superiority die to the 
attack’s damage roll. 

Goading Attack. When you hit a creature with a 
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to 
attempt to goad the target into attacking you. You add 
the superiority die to the attack’s damage roll, and 
the target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a 
failed save, the target has disadvantage on all attack 
rolls against targets other than you until the end of 
your next turn. 

Lunging Attack. When you make a melee weapon 
attack on your turn, you can expend one superiority die 
to increase your reach for that attack by 5 feet. If you hit, 
you add the superiority die to the attack’s damage roll. 


Maneuvering Attack. When you hit a creature with 
a weapon attack, you can expend one superiority 
die to maneuver one of your comrades into a more 
advantageous position. You add the superiority die to the 
attack’s damage roll, and you choose a friendly creature 
who can see or hear you. That creature can use its 
reaction to move up to half its speed without provoking 
opportunity attacks from the target of your attack. 

Menacing Attack. When you hit a creature with a 
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to 
attempt to frighten the target. You add the superiority 
die to the attack’s damage roll, and the target must 
make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, it is 
frightened of you until the end of your next turn. 

Parry. When another creature damages you with a 
melee attack, you can use your reaction and expend one 
superiority die to reduce the damage by the number you 
roll on your superiority die + your Dexterity modifier. 

Precision Attack. When you make a weapon attack 
roll against a creature, you can expend one superiority 
die to add it to the roll. You can use this maneuver 
before or after making the attack roll, but before any 
effects of the attack are applied. 

Pushing Attack. When you hit a creature with 
a weapon attack, you can expend one superiority 
die to attempt to drive the target back. You add the 
superiority die to the attack's damage roll, and if the 
target is Large or smaller, it must make a Strength 
saving throw. On a failed save, you push the target up 
to 15 feet away from you. 

Rally. On your turn, you can use a bonus action and 
expend one superiority die to bolster the resolve of one 
of your companions. When you do so, choose a friendly 
creature who can see or hear you. That creature gains 
temporary hit points equal to the superiority die roll + 
your Charisma modifier. 

Riposte. When a creature misses you with a melee 
attack, you can use your reaction and expend one 
superiority die to make a melee weapon attack against 
the creature. If you hit, you add the superiority die to the 
attack’s damage roll. 

Sweeping Attack. When you hit a creature with a 
melee weapon attack, you can expend one superiority 
die to attempt to damage another creature with the 
same attack. Choose another creature within 5 feet 
of the original target and within your reach. If the 
original attack roll would hit the second creature, it 
takes damage equal to the number you roll on your 
superiority die. The damage is of the same type dealt by 
the original attack. 

Trip Attack. When you hit a creature with a weapon 
attack, you can expend one superiority die to attempt 
to knock the target down. You add the superiority die 
to the attack’s damage roll, and if the target is Large or 
smaller, it must make a Strength saving throw. On a 
failed save, you knock the target prone. 

Eldritch Knight 

The archetypal Eldritch Knight combines the martial 
mastery common to all fighters with a careful study of 
magic. Eldritch Knights use magical techniques similar 
to those practiced by wizards. They focus their study 










on two of the eight schools of magic: abjuration and 
evocation. Abjuration spells grant an Eldritch Knight 
additional protection in battle, and evocation spells deal 
damage to many foes at once, extending the fighter’s 
reach in combat. These knights learn a comparatively 
small number of spells, committing them to memory 
instead of keeping them in a spellbook. 

Spellcasting 

When you reach 3rd level, you augment your martial 
prowess with the ability to cast spells. See chapter 10 
for the general rules of spellcasting and chapter 11 for 
the wizard spell list. 

Cantrips. You learn two cantrips of your choice from 
the wizard spell list. You learn an additional wizard 
cantrip of your choice at 10th level. 

Spell Slots. The Eldritch Knight Spellcasting table 
shows how many spell slots you have to cast your 
spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of these 
spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level or 
higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you 
finish a long rest. 

For example, if you know the Ist-level spell shield and 
have a Ist-level and a 2nd-level spell slot available, you 
can cast shield using either slot. 

Spells Known of Ist-Levet and Higher. You know 
three Ist-level wizard spells of your choice, two of which 
you must choose from the abjuration and evocation 
spells on the wizard spell list. 

The Spells Known column of the Eldritch Knight 
Spellcasting table shows when you learn more wizard 
spells of 1st level or higher. Each of these spells must be 
an abjuration or evocation spell of your choice, and must 
be of a level for which you have spell slots. For instance, 
when you reach 7th level in this class, you can learn one 
new spell of 1st or 2nd level. 

The spells you learn at 8th, 14th, and 20th level can 
come from any school of magic. 

Whenever you gain a level in this class, you can 
replace one of the wizard spells you know with another 
spell of your choice from the wizard spell list. The 
new spell must be of a level for which you have spell 
slots, and it must be an abjuration or evocation spell, 
unless you’re replacing the spell you gained at 8th, 14th, 
or 20th level. 

Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting 
ability for your wizard spells, since you learn your 
spells through study and memorization. You use your 
Intelligence whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting 
ability. In addition, you use your Intelligence modifier 
when setting the saving throw DC for a wizard spell you 
cast and when making an attack roll with one. 

Spell save DC = 8 -i- your proficiency bonus + 
your Intelligence modifier 

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + 
your Intelligence modifier 

Weapon Bond 

At 3rd level, you learn a ritual that creates a magical 
bond between yourself and one weapon. You perform 
the ritual over the course of 1 hour, which can be done 


Eldritch Knight Spellcastinc 

• c- II —Spell Slots per Spell Level— 

Fighter Cantrips Spells r r 

Level Known Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 

3rd 2 3 2 — — — 

4th 2 4 3 — — — 

5th 2 4 3 — — — 

6th 2 4 3 — — — 

7th 2 5 4 2 — — 

8th 2 6 4 2 — — 

9th 2 6 4 2 — — 

10th 3 7 4 3 — — 

11th 3 8 4 3 — — 

12th 3 8 4 3 — — 

13th 3 9 4 3 2 — 

14th 3 10 4 3 2 — 

15th 3 10 4 3 2 

16th 3 11 4 3 3 — 

17th 3 11 4 3 3 — 

18th 3 11 4 3 3 — 

19th 3 12 4 3 3 1 

20th 3 13 4 3 3 1 

during a short rest. The weapon must be within your 
reach throughout the ritual, at the conclusion of which 
you touch the weapon and forge the bond. 

Once you have bonded a weapon to yourself, you 
can’t be disarmed of that weapon unless you are 
incapacitated. If it is on the same plane of existence, 
you can summon that weapon as a bonus action on your 
turn, causing it to teleport instantly to your hand. 

You can have up to two bonded weapons, but can 
summon only one at a time with your bonus action. 

If you attempt to bond with a third weapon, you must 
break the bond with one of the other two. 

War Magic 

Beginning at 7th level, when you use your action to 
cast a cantrip, you can make one weapon attack as a 
bonus action. 

Eldritch Strike 

At 10th level, you learn how to make your weapon 
strikes undercut a creature’s resistance to your spells. 
When you hit a creature with a weapon attack, that 
creature has disadvantage on the next saving throw 
it makes against a spell you cast before the end of 
your next turn. 

Arcane Charge 

At 15th level, you gain the ability to teleport up to 30 
feet to an unoccupied space you can see when you use 
your Action Surge. You can teleport before or after the 
additional action. 

Improved War Magic 

Starting at 18th level, when you use your action to 
cast a spell, you can make one weapon attack as a 
bonus action. 




into the massed ranks of hobgoblins on the other side. 
She whirls among them, knocking their blows aside and 
sending them reeling, until at last she stands alone. 

Taking a deep breath, a human covered in tattoos 
settles into a battle stance. As the first charging ores 
reach him, he exhales and a blast of fire roars from his 
mouth, engulfing his foes. 

Moving with the silence of the night, a black-clad 
halfling steps into a shadow beneath an arch and 
emerges from another inky shadow on a balcony a 
stone’s throw away. She slides her blade free of its cloth- 
wrapped scabbard and peers through the open window 
at the tyrant prince, so vulnerable in the grip of sleep. 

Whatever their discipline, monks are united in their 
ability to magically harness the energy that flows in 
their bodies. Whether channeled as a striking display 
of combat prowess or a subtler focus of defensive ability 
and speed, this energy infuses all that a monk does. 

The Magic of Ki 

Monks make careful study of a magical energy that most 
monastic traditions call ki. This energy is an element 
of the magic that suffuses the multiverse—specifically, 
the element that flows through living bodies. Monks 
harness this power within themselves to create magical 
effects and exceed their bodies' physical capabilities, 
and some of their special attacks can hinder the flow of 
ki in their opponents. Using this energy, monks channel 
uncanny speed and strength into their unarmed strikes. 
As they gain experience, their martial training and their 
mastery of ki gives them more power over their bodies 
and the bodies of their foes. 


Training and Asceticism 

Small walled cloisters dot the landscapes of the worlds 
of D&D, tiny refuges from the flow of ordinary life, 
where time seems to stand still. The monks who live 
there seek personal perfection through contemplation 
and rigorous training. Many entered the monastery 
as children, sent to live there when their parents died, 
when food couldn’t be found to support them, or in 
return for some kindness that the monks had performed 
for their families. 

Some monks live entirely apart from the surrounding 
population, secluded from anything that might impede 
their spiritual progress. Others are sworn to isolation. 

















The Monk 

Proficiency 
Level Bonus 

Martial 

Arts 

Ki 

Points 

Unarmored 

Movement 

Features 

1st 

+2 

ld4 

— 

— 

Unarmored Defense, Martial Arts 

2nd 

+2 

ld4 

2 

+10 ft. 

Ki, Unarmored Movement 

3rd 

+2 

ld4 

3 

+10 ft. 

Monastic Tradition, Deflect Missiles 

4th 

+2 

ld4 

4 

+10 ft. 

Ability Score Improvement, Slow Fall 

5th 

+3 

ld6 

5 

+10 ft. 

Extra Attack, Stunning Strike 

6th 

+3 

ld6 

6 

+15 ft. 

Ki-Empowered Strikes, Monastic Tradition feature 

7th 

+3 

ld6 

7 

+15 ft. 

Evasion, Stillness of Mind 

8th 

+3 

ld6 

8 

+15 ft. 

Ability Score Improvement 

9th 

+4 

ld6 

9 

+15 ft. 

Unarmored Movement improvement 

10th 

+4 

ld6 

10 

+20 ft. 

Purity of Body 

nth 

+4 

ld8 

11 

+20 ft. 

Monastic Tradition feature 

12th 

+4 

ld8 

12 

+20 ft. 

Ability Score Improvement 

13th 

+5 

ld8 

13 

+20 ft. 

Tongue of the Sun and Moon 

14th 

+5 

ld8 

14 

+25 ft. 

Diamond Soul 

15th 

+5 

ld8 

15 

+25 ft. 

Timeless Body 

16th 

+5 

ld8 

16 

+25 ft. 

Ability Score Improvement 

17th 

+6 

IdlO 

17 

+25 ft. 

Monastic Tradition feature 

18th 

+6 

IdlO 

18 

+30 ft. 

Empty Body 

19th 

+6 

IdlO 

19 

+30 ft. 

Ability Score Improvement 

20th 

+6 

IdlO 

20 

+30 ft. 

Perfect Self 

s 


emerging only to serve as spies or assassins at the 
command of their leader, a noble patron, or some other 
mortal or divine power. 

The majority of monks don’t shun their neighbors, 
making frequent visits to nearby towns or villages and 
exchanging their service for food and other goods. As 
versatile warriors, monks often end up protecting their 
neighbors from monsters or tyrants. 

For a monk, becoming an adventurer means leaving 
a structured, communal lifestyle to become a wanderer. 
This can be a harsh transition, and monks don’t 
undertake it lightly. Those who leave their cloisters take 
their work seriously, approaching their adventures as 
personal tests of their physical and spiritual growth. 

As a rule, monks care little for material wealth and are 
driven by a desire to accomplish a greater mission than 
merely slaying monsters and plundering their treasure. 

Creating a Monk 

As you make your monk character, think about your 
connection to the monastery where you learned your 
skills and spent your formative years. Were you an 
orphan or a child left on the monastery's threshold? Did 
your parents promise you to the monastery in gratitude 
for a service performed by the monks? Did you enter 
this secluded life to hide from a crime you committed? 
Or did you choose the monastic life for yourself? 

Consider why you left. Did the head of your monastery 
choose you for a particularly important mission beyond 
the cloister? Perhaps you were cast out because of 
some violation of the community's rules. Did you dread 
leaving, or were you happy to go? Is there something 
you hope to accomplish outside the monastery? Are you 
eager to return to your home? 


As a result of the structured life of a monastic 
community and the discipline required to harness ki, 
monks are almost always lawful in alignment. 

Quick Build 

You can make a monk quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, make Dexterity your highest 
ability score, followed by Wisdom. Second, choose the 
hermit background. 

Class Features 

As a monk, you gain the following class features. 

Hit Points 

Hit Dice; ld8 per monk level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: ld8 (or 5) + your 
Constitution modifier per monk level after 1st 

Proficiencies 

Armor: None 

Weapons; Simple weapons, shortswords 
Tools: Choose one type of artisan’s tools or one 
musical instrument 

Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity 
Skills: Choose two from Acrobatics, Athletics, History, 
Insight, Religion, and Stealth 

Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 

• (a) a shortsword or (6) any simple weapon 

• (a) a dungeoneer’s pack or (b) an explorer’s pack 

• 10 darts 






Unarmored Defense 

Beginning at 1st level, while you are wearing no armor 
and not wielding a shield, your AC equals 10 + your 
Dexterity modifier + your Wisdom modifier. 

Martial Arts 

At 1st level, your practice of martial arts gives you 
mastery of combat styles that use unarmed strikes and 
monk weapons, which are shortswords and any simple 
melee weapons that don’t have the two-handed or 
heavy property. 

You gain the following benefits while you are unarmed 
or wielding only monk weapons and you aren’t wearing 
armor or wielding a shield: 

• You can use Dexterity instead of Strength for the 
attack and damage rolls of your unarmed strikes and 
monk weapons. 

• You can roll a d4 in place of the normal damage 
of your unarmed strike or monk weapon. This die 
changes as you gain monk levels, as shown in the 
Martial Arts column of the Monk table. 

• When you use the Attack action with an unarmed 
strike or a monk weapon on your turn, you can make 
one unarmed strike as a bonus action. For example, if 
you take the Attack action and attack with a quarter- 
staff, you can also make an unarmed strike as a bonus 
action, assuming you haven't already taken a bonus 
action this turn. 

Certain monasteries use specialized forms of the 
monk weapons. For example, you might use a club 
that is two lengths of wood connected by a short chain 
(called a nunchaku) or a sickle with a shorter, straighter 
blade (called a kama). Whatever name you use for a 
monk weapon, you can use the game statistics provided 
for the weapon in chapter 5. 

Ki 

Starting at 2nd level, your training allows you to 
harness the mystic energy of ki. Your access to this 
energy is represented by a number of ki points. Your 
monk level determines the number of points you have, 
as shown in the Ki Points column of the Monk table. 

You can spend these points to fuel various ki features. 
You start knowing three such features: Flurry of Blows, 
Patient Defense, and Step of the Wind. You learn more 
ki features as you gain levels in this class. 

When you spend a ki point, it is unavailable until 
you finish a short or long re,st, at the end of which you 
draw all of your expended ki back into yourself. You 
must spend at least 30 minutes of the rest meditating to 
regain your ki points. 

Some of your ki features require your target to make 
a saving throw to resist the feature’s effects. The saving 
throw DC is calculated as follows: 

Ki save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + 
your Wisdom modifier 


Flurry of Blows 

Immediately after you take the Attack action on your 
turn, you can spend 1 ki point to make two unarmed 
strikes as a bonus action. 

Patient Defense 

You can spend 1 ki point to take the Dodge action as a 
bonus action on your turn. 

Step of the Wind 

You can spend 1 ki point to take the Disengage or Dash 
action as a bonus action on your turn, and your jump 
distance is doubled for the turn. 

Unarmored Movement 

Starting at 2nd level, your speed increases by 10 feet 
while you are not wearing armor or wielding a shield. 
This bonus increases when you reach certain monk 
levels, as shown in the Monk table. 

At 9th level, you gain the ability to move along vertical 
surfaces and across liquids on your turn without falling 
during the move. 

Monastic Tradition 

When you reach 3rd level, you commit yourself to a 
monastic tradition: the Way of the Open Hand, the Way 
of Shadow, or the Way of the Four Elements, all detailed 
at the end of the class description. Your tradition 
grants you features at 3rd level and again at 6th, 11th, 
and 17th level. 

Deflect Missiles 

Starting at 3rd level, you can use your reaction to 
deflect or catch the missile when you are hit by a ranged 
weapon attack. When you do so, the damage you take 
from the attack is reduced by IdlO + your Dexterity 
modifier + your monk level. 

If you reduce the damage to 0. you can catch the 
missile if it is small enough for you to hold in one hand 
and you have at least one hand free. If you catch a 
missile in this way, you can spend 1 ki point to make a 
ranged attack with the weapon or piece of ammunition 
you just caught, as part of the same reaction. You make 
this attack with proficiency, regardless of your weapon 
proficiencies, and the missile counts as a monk weapon 
for the attack. 

Ability Score Improvement 

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, 
and 19th level, you can increase one ability score of your 
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of 
your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase an ability 
score above 20 using this feature. 

Slow Fall 

Beginning at 4th level, you can use your reaction when 
you fall to reduce any falling damage you take by an 
amount equal to five times your monk level. 



















Extra Attack 

Beginning at 5th level, you can attack twice, instead of 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 

Stunning Strike 

Starting at 5th level, you can interfere with the flow of 
ki in an opponent’s body. When you hit another creature 
with a melee weapon attack, you can spend 1 ki point to 
attempt a stunning strike. The target must succeed on a 
Constitution saving throw or be stunned until the end of 
your next turn. 

Ki-Empowered Strikes 

Starting at 6th level, your unarmed strikes count as 
magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and 
immunity to nonmagical attacks and damage. 

Evasion 

At 7th level, your instinctive agility lets you dodge 
out of the way of certain area effects, such as a blue 
dragon’s lightning breath or a fireball spell. When you 
are subjected to an effect that allows you to make a 
Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, you 
instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving 
throw, and only half damage if you fail. 

Stillness of Mind 

Starting at 7th level, you can use your action to end one 
effect on yourself that is causing you to be charmed 
or frightened. 

Purity of Body 

At 10th level, your mastery of the ki flowing through you 
makes you immune to disease and poison. 

Tongue of the Sun and Moon 

Starting at 13th level, you learn to touch the ki of other 
minds so that you understand all spoken languages. 
Moreover, any creature that can understand a language 
can understand what you say. 

Diamond Soul 

Beginning at 14th level, your mastery of ki grants you 
proficiency in all saving throws. 

Additionally, whenever you make a saving throw and 
fail, you can spend 1 ki point to reroll it and take the 
second result. 

Timeless Body 

At 15th level, your ki sustains you so that you suffer 
none of the frailty of old age, and you can’t be aged 
magically. You can still die of old age, however. In 
addition, you no longer need food or water. 

Empty Body 

Beginning at 18th level, you can use your action to 
spend 4 ki points to become invisible for 1 minute. 


During that time, you also have resistance to all damage 
but force damage. 

Additionally, you can spend 8 ki points to cast the 
astral projection spell, without needing material 
components. When you do so, you can’t take any other 
creatures with you. 

Perfect Self 

At 20th level, when you roll for initiative and have no ki 
points remaining, you regain 4 ki points. 

Monastic Traditions 

Three traditions of monastic pursuit are common in 
the monasteries scattered across the multiverse. Most 
monasteries practice one tradition exclusively, but a 
few honor the three traditions and instruct each monk 
according to his or her aptitude and interest. All three 
traditions rely on the same basic techniques, diverging 
as the student grows more adept. Thus, a monk need 
choose a tradition only upon reaching 3rd level. 

Way of the Open Hand 

Monks of the Way of the Open Hand are the ultimate 
masters of martial arts combat, whether armed or 
unarmed. They learn techniques to push and trip their 
opponents, manipulate ki to heal damage to their 
bodies, and practice advanced meditation that can 
protect them from harm. 

Open Hand Techniq,ue 
Starting when you choose this tradition at 3rd level, 
you can manipulate your enemy’s ki when you harness 
your own. Whenever you hit a creature with one of the 
attacks granted by your Flurry of Blows, you can impose 
one of the following effects on that target: 

• It must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 

• It must make a Strength saving throw. If it fails, you 
can push it up to 15 feet away from you. 

• It can’t take reactions until the end of your next turn. 


Wholeness of Body 

At 6th level, you gain the ability to heal yourself. As an 
action, you can regain hit points equal to three times 




your monk level. You must finish a long rest before you 
can use this feature again. 

TRANQ.UILITY 

Beginning at 11th level, you can enter a special 
meditation that surrounds you with an aura of peace. At 
the end of a long rest, you gain the effect of a sanctuary 
spell that lasts until the start of your next long rest (the 
spell can end early as normal). The saving throw DC 
for the spell equals 8 + your Wisdom modifier + your 
proficiency bonus. 

Quivering Palm 

At 17th level, you gain the ability to set up lethal 
vibrations in someone’s body. When you hit a creature 
with an unarmed strike, you can spend 3 ki points to 
start these imperceptible vibrations, which last for a 
number of days equal to your monk level. The vibrations 
are harmless unless you use your action to end them. 

To do so, you and the target must be on the same plane 
of existence. When you use this action, the creature 
must make a Constitution saving throw. If it fails, it is 
reduced to 0 hit points. If it succeeds, it takes lOdlO 
necrotic damage. 

You can have only one creature under the effect of this 
feature at a time. You can choose to end the vibrations 
harmlessly without using an action. 

Way of Shadow 

Monks of the Way of Shadow follow a tradition that 
values stealth and subterfuge. These monks might 
be called ninjas or shadowdancers, and they serve as 
spies and assassins. Sometimes the members of a 
ninja monastery are family members, forming a clan 
sworn to secrecy about their arts and missions. Other 
monasteries are more like thieves’ guilds, hiring out 
their services to nobles, rich merchants, or anyone else 
who can pay their fees. Regardless of their methods, the 
heads of these monasteries expect the unquestioning 
obedience of their students. 

Shadow Arts 

Starting when you choose this tradition at 3rd level, you 
can use your ki to duplicate the effects of certain spells. 
As an action, you can spend 2 ki points to cast darkness, 
darkvision, pass without trace, or silence, without 
providing material components. Additionally, you gain 
the minor illusion cantrip if you don’t already know it. 

Shadow Step 

At 6th level, you gain the ability to step from one shadow 
into another. When you are in dim light or darkness, 
as a bonus action you can teleport up to 60 feet to an 
unoccupied space you can see that is also in dim light 
or darkness. You then have advantage on the first melee 
attack you make before the end of the turn. 

Cloak of Shadows 

By 11th level, you have learned to become one with 
the shadows. When you are in an area of dim light or 
darkness, you can use your action to become invisible. 
You remain invisible until you make an attack, cast a 
spell, or are in an area of bright light. 


Opportunist 

At 17th level, you can exploit a creature's momentary 
distraction when it is hit by an attack. Whenever a 
creature within 5 feet of you is hit by an attack made by 
a creature other than you, you can use your reaction to 
make a melee attack against that creature. 

Way of the Four Elements 

You follow a monastic tradition that teaches you to 
harness the elements. When you focus your ki, you can 
align yourself with the forces of creation and bend the 
four elements to your will, using them as an extension 
of your body. Some members of this tradition dedicate 
themselves to a single element, but others weave the 
elements together. 

Many monks of this tradition tattoo their bodies with 
representations of their ki powers, commonly imagined 
as coiling dragons, but also as phoenixes, fish, plants, 
mountains, and cresting waves. 

Disciple of the Elements 
When you choose this tradition at 3rd level, you learn 
magical disciplines that harness the power of the four 
elements. A discipline requires you to spend ki points 
each time you use it. 

You know the Elemental Attunement discipline and 
one other elemental discipline of your choice, which are 
detailed in the “Elemental Disciplines” section below. 
You learn one additional elemental discipline of your 
choice at 6th, 11th, and 17th level. 

Whenever you learn a new elemental discipline, 
you can also replace one elemental discipline that you 
already know with a different discipline. 

Casting Elemental Spells. Some elemental 
disciplines allow you to cast spells. See chapter 10 for 
the general rules of spellcasting. To cast one of these 
spells, you use its casting time and other rules, but you 
don’t need to provide material components for it. 

Once you reach 5th level in this class, you can spend 
additional ki points to increase the level of an elemental 
discipline spell that you cast, provided that the spell has 
an enhanced effect at a higher level, as burning hands 
does. The spell’s level increases by 1 for each additional 
ki point you spend. For example, if you are a 5th-level 
monk and use Sweeping Cinder Strike to cast burning 
hands, you can spend 3 ki points to cast it as a 2nd-level 
spell (the discipline’s base cost of 2 ki points plus 1). 

The maximum number of ki points you can spend to 
cast a spell in this way (including its base ki point cost 
and any additional ki points you spend to increase its 
level) is determined by your monk level, as shown in the 
Spells and Ki Points table. 

Spells and Ki Points 

Monk Levels Maximum Ki Points for a Spell 

5th-8th 3 

9th-12th 4 

13th-16th 5 

17th-20th 6 



Elemental Disciplines 

The elemental disciplines are presented in alphabetical 
order. If a discipline requires a level, you must be that 
level in this class to learn the discipline. 

Breath of Winter (17th Level Required). You can 
spend 6 ki points to cast cone of cold. 

Clench of the North Wind (6th Level Required). You 
can spend 3 ki points to cast hold person. 

Elemental Attunement. You can use your action to 
briefly control elemental forces nearby, causing one of 
the following effects of your choice; 

• Create a harmless, instantaneous sensory effect 
related to air, earth, fire, or water, such as a shower of 
sparks, a puff of wind, a spray of light mist, or a gentle 
rumbling of stone. 

• Instantaneously light or snuff out a candle, a torch, or 
a small campfire. 

• Chill or warm up to 1 pound of nonliving material for 
up to 1 hour. 

• Cause earth, fire, water, or mist that can fit within a 
1-foot cube to shape itself into a crude form you desig¬ 
nate for 1 minute. 

Eternal Mountain Defense (11th Level Required). 

You can spend 5 ki points to cast stoneskin, 
targeting yourself. 

Fangs of the Fire Snake. When you use the Attack 
action on your turn, you can spend 1 ki point to cause 
tendrils of flame to stretch out from your fists and feet. 
Your reach with your unarmed strikes increases by 
10 feet for that action, as well as the rest of the turn. 

A hit with such an attack deals fire damage instead of 
bludgeoning damage, and if you spend 1 ki point when 
the attack hits, it also deals an extra IdlO fire damage. 

Fist of Four Thunders. You can spend 2 ki points to 
cast thunderwave. 

Fist of Unbroken Air. You can create a blast of 
compressed air that strikes like a mighty fist. As an 
action, you can spend 2 ki points and choose a creature 
within 30 feet of you. That creature must make a 
Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature 
takes 3dl0 bludgeoning damage, plus an extra IdlO 
bludgeoning damage for each additional ki point you 
spend, and you can push the creature up to 20 feet away 
from you and knock it prone. On a successful save, the 
creature takes half as much damage, and you don’t push 
it or knock it prone. 

Flames of the Phoenix (11th Level Required). You 
can spend 4 ki points to cast fireball. 

Gong of the Summit (6th Level Required). You can 
spend 3 ki points to cast shatter. 

Mist Stance (11th Level Required). You can spend 4 
ki points to cast gaseous form, targeting yourself. 

Ride the Wind (11th Level Required). You can spend 
4 ki points to cast fly, targeting yourself. 

River of Hungry Flame (17th Level Required). You 
can spend 5 ki points to cast wall of hre. 

Rush of the Gale Spirits. You can spend 2 ki points 
to cast gust of wind. 


Shape the Flowing River. As an action, you can 
spend 1 ki point to choose an area of ice or water no 
larger than 30 feet on a side within 120 feet of you. You 
can change water to ice within the area and vice versa, 
and you can reshape ice in the area in any manner you 
choose. You can raise or lower the ice’s elevation, create 
or fill in a trench, erect or flatten a wall, or form a pillar. 
The extent of any such changes can’t exceed half the 
area’s largest dimension. For example, if you affect a 
30-foot square, you can create a pillar up to 15 feet high, 
raise or lower the square’s elevation by up to 15 feet, dig 
a trench up to 15 feet deep, and so on. You can’t shape 
the ice to trap or injure a creature in the area. 

Sweeping Cinder Strike. You can spend 2 ki points to 
cast burning hands. 

Water Whip. You can spend 2 ki points as a bonus 
action to create a whip of water that shoves and pulls 
a creature to unbalance it. A creature that you can see 
that is within 30 feet of you must make a Dexterity 
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3dl0 
bludgeoning damage, plus an extra IdlO bludgeoning 
damage for each additional ki point you spend, and you 
can either knock it prone or pull it up to 25 feet closer 
to you. On a successful save, the creature takes half as 
much damage, and you don’t pull it or knock it prone. 

Wave of Rolling Earth (17th Level Required). You 
can spend 6 ki points to cast wall of stone. 

_Ik 

Monastic Orders 

The worlds of D&.D contain a multitude of monasteries 
and monastic traditions. In lands with an Asian cultural 
flavor, such as Shou Lung far to the east of the Forgotten 
Realms, these monasteries are associated with philosophical 
traditions and martial arts practice. The Iron Hand School, 
the Five Stars School, the Northern Fist School, and 
the Southern Star School of Shou Lung teach different 
approaches to the physical, mental, and spiritual disciplines 
of the monk. Some of these monasteries have spread to the 
western lands of Faerun, particularly in places with large 
Shou immigrant communities, such as Thesk and Westgate. 

Other monastic traditions are associated with deities who 
teach the value of physical excellence and mental discipline. 

In the Forgotten Realms, the order of the Dark Moon is 
made up of monks dedicated to Shar (goddess of loss), who 
maintain secret communities in remote hills, back allies, 
and subterranean hideaways. Monasteries of llmater (god 
of endurance) are named after flowers, and their orders 
carry the names of great heroes of the faith; the Disciples of 
Saint Sollars the Twice-Martyred reside in the Monastery of 
the Yellow Rose near Damara, The monasteries of Eberron 
combine the study of martial arts with a life of scholarship. 
Most are devoted to the deities of the Sovereign Host. 

In the world of Dragonlance, most monks are devoted to 
Majere, god of meditation and thought. In Creyhawk, many 
monasteries are dedicated to Xan Yae, the goddess of twilight 
and the superiority of mind over matter, or to Zuoken, god of 
mental and physical mastery. 

The evil monks of the Scarlet Brotherhood in the world of 
Greyhawk derive their fanatic zeal not from devotion to a god 
but from dedication to the principles of their nation and their 
race—the belief that the Suel strand of humanity are meant 
to rule the world. 

-p- 








Paladin 

Clad in plate armor that gleams in the sunlight despite 
the dust and grime of long travel, a human lays down 
her sword and shield and places her hands on a mortally 
wounded man. Divine radiance shines from her hands, 
the man’s wounds knit closed, and his eyes open wide 
with amazement. 

A dwarf crouches behind an outcrop, his black cloak 
making him nearly invisible in the night, and watches 
an ore war band celebrating its recent victory. Silently, 
he stalks into their midst and whispers an oath, and two 
ores are dead before they even realize he is there. 

Silver hair shining in a shaft of light that seems to 
illuminate only him, an elf laughs with exultation. His 
spear flashes like his eyes as he jabs again and again 
at a twisted giant, until at last his light overcomes its 
hideous darkness. 

Whatever their origin and their mission, paladins are 
united by their oaths to stand against the forces of evil. 
Whether sworn before a god’s altar and the witness of 
a priest, in a sacred glade before nature spirits and fey 
beings, or in a moment of desperation and grief with the 
dead as the only witness, a paladin’s oath is a powerful 
bond. It is a source of power that turns a devout warrior 
into a blessed champion. 

The Cause of Righteousness 

A paladin swears to uphold justice and righteousness, 
to stand with the good things of the world against the 
encroaching darkness, and to hunt the forces of evil 
wherever they lurk. Different paladins focus on various 
aspects of the cause of righteousness, but all are 
bound by the oaths that grant them power to do their 
sacred work. Although many paladins are devoted to 
gods of good, a paladin’s power comes as much from a 
commitment to justice itself as it does from a god. 

Paladins train for years to learn the skills of combat, 
mastering a variety of weapons and armor. Even so, 
their martial skills are secondary to the magical power 
they wield: power to heal the sick and injured, to smite 
the wicked and the undead, and to protect the innocent 
and those who join them in the fight for justice. 

Beyond the Mundane Life 

Almost by definition, the life of a paladin is an 
adventuring life. Unless a lasting injury has taken him 
or her away from adventuring for a time, every paladin 
lives on the front lines of the cosmic struggle against 
























The Paladin 




1 

Level 

Proficiency 

Bonus Features 

1st 

—Spell Slots per Spell Level— 

2nd 3rd 4th 

5th 

1st 

+2 

Divine Sense, Lay on Hands 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

2nd 

+2 

Fighting Style, Spellcasting, Divine Smite 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

3rd 

+2 

Divine Health, Sacred Oath 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

4th 

+2 

Ability Score Improvement 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

5th 

+3 

Extra Attack 

4 

2 

— 

— 

— 

6th 

+3 

Aura of Protection 

4 

2 

— 

— 

— 

7th 

+3 

Sacred Oath feature 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

8th 

+3 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

9th 

+4 

— 

4 

3 

2 

— 

— 

10th 

+4 

Aura of Courage 

4 

3 

2 

— 

— 

11th 

+4 

Improved Divine Smite 

4 

3 

3 

— 

— 

12th 

+4 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

3 

3 

— 

— 

13 th 

+5 

— 

4 

3 

3 

1 

— 

14th 

+5 

Cleansing Touch 

4 

3 

3 

1 

— 

15th 

+5 

Sacred Oath feature 

4 

3 

3 

2 

— 

16th 

+5 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

3 

3 

2 

— 

17th 

+6 

— 

4 

3 

3 

3 

1 

18th 

+6 

Aura improvements 

4 

3 

3 

3 

1 

19th 

+6 

Ability Score Improvement 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

20th 

s. 

+6 

Sacred Oath feature 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 





■■IBH 


m u,m 

( 


evil. Fighters are rare enough among the ranks of the 
militias and armies of the world, but even fewer people 
can claim the true calling of a paladin. When they do 
receive the call, these warriors turn from their former 
occupations and take up arms to fight evil. Sometimes 
their oaths lead them into the service of the crown as 
leaders of elite groups of knights, but even then their 
loyalty is first to the cause of righteousness, not to 
crown and country. 

Adventuring paladins take their work seriously. A 
delve into an ancient ruin or dusty crypt can be a quest 
driven by a higher purpose than the acquisition of 
treasure. Evil lurks in dungeons and primeval forests, 
and even the smallest victory against it can tilt the 
cosmic balance away from oblivion. 

Creating a Paladin 

The most important aspect of a paladin character is 
the nature of his or her holy quest. Although the class 
features related to your oath don't appear until you 
reach 3rd level, plan ahead for that choice by reading 
the oath descriptions at the end of the class. Are you a 
devoted servant of good, loyal to the gods of justice and 
honor, a holy knight in shining armor venturing forth 
to smite evil? Are you a glorious champion of the light, 
cherishing everything beautiful that stands against the 
shadow, a knight whose oath descends from traditions 
older than many of the gods? Or are you an embittered 
loner sworn to take vengeance on those who have done 
great evil, sent as an angel of death by the gods or driven 
by your need for revenge? Appendix B lists many deities 
worshiped by paladins throughout the multiverse, such 



as Torm, Tyr, Heironeous, 

Paladine, Kiri-Jolith, Dol 
Arrah, the Silver Flame, 

Bahamut, Athena, Re-Horakhty, 
and Heimdall. 

How did you experience your call to 
serve as a paladin? Did you hear a whisper 
from an unseen god or angel while you were at 
prayer? Did another paladin sense the potential within 
you and decide to train you as a squire? Or did some 
terrible event—the destruction of your home, perhaps— 
drive you to your quests? Perhaps you stumbled into 
a sacred grove or a hidden elven enclave and found 
yourself called to protect all such refuges of goodness 
and beauty. Or you might have known from your earliest 
memories that the paladin’s life was your calling, almost 
as if you had been sent into the world with that purpose 
stamped on your soul. 

As guardians against the forces of wickedness, 
paladins are rarely of any evil alignment. Most of them 
walk the paths of charity and justice. Consider how your 
alignment colors the way you pursue your holy quest 
and the manner in which you conduct yourself before 
gods and mortals. Your oath and alignment might be 
in harmony, or your oath might represent standards of 
behavior that you have not yet attained. 

Quick Build 

You can make a paladin quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, Strength should be your highest 
ability score, followed by Charisma. Second, choose the 
noble background. 


J 












Class Features 

As a paladin, you gain the following class features. 

Hit Points 

Hit Dice: Id 10 per paladin level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 10 + your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: IdlO (or 6) + your 
Constitution modifier per paladin level after 1st 

Proficiencies 

Armor: All armor, shields 

Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons 

Tools: None 

Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma 
Skills: Choose two from Athletics, Insight, Intimidation, 
Medicine, Persuasion, and Religion 

Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 

• (a) a martial weapon and a shield or (b) two martial 
weapons 

• (a) five javelins or (b) any simple melee weapon 

• (a) a priest’s pack or (h) an explorer’s pack 

• Chain mail and a holy symbol 

Divine Sense 

The presence of strong evil registers on your senses like 
a noxious odor, and powerful good rings like heavenly 
music in your ears. As an action, you can open your 
awareness to detect such forces. Until the end of your 
next turn, you know the location of any celestial, fiend, 
or undead within 60 feet of you that is not behind total 
cover. You know the type (celestial, fiend, or undead) of 
any being whose presence you sense, but not its identity 
(the vampire Count Strahd von Zarovich, for instance). 
Within the same radius, you also detect the presence 
of any place or object that has been consecrated or 
desecrated, as with the hallow spell. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
1 + your Charisma modifier. When you finish a long rest, 
you regain all expended uses. 

Lay on Hands 

Your blessed touch can heal wounds. You have a pool 
of healing power that replenishes when you take a long 
rest. With that pool, you can restore a total number of 
hit points equal to your paladin level x 5. 

As an action, you can touch a creature and draw 
power from the pool to restore a number of hit points 
to that creature, up to the maximum amount remaining 
in your pool. 

Alternatively, you can expend 5 hit points from your 
pool of healing to cure the target of one disease or 
neutralize one poison affecting it. You can cure multiple 
diseases and neutralize multiple poisons with a single 
use of Lay on Hands, expending hit points separately 
for each one. 

This feature has no effect on undead and constructs. 


Fighting Style 

At 2nd level, you adopt a style of fighting as your 
specialty. Choose one of the following options. You can’t 
take a Fighting Style option more than once, even if you 
later get to choose again. 

Defense 

While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to AC. 
Dueling 

When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and 
no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls 
with that weapon. 

Great Weapon Fighting 

When you roll a 1 or 2 on a damage die for an attack you 
make with a melee weapon that you are wielding with 
two hands, you can reroll the die and must use the new 
roll. The weapon must have the two-handed or versatile 
property for you to gain this benefit. 

Protection 

When a creature you can see attacks a target other 
than you that is within 5 feet of you, you can use your 
reaction to impose disadvantage on the attack roll. 

You must be wielding a shield. 

Spellcasting 

By 2nd level, you have learned to draw on divine 
magic through meditation and prayer to cast spells as 
a cleric does. See chapter 10 for the general rules of 
spellcasting and chapter 11 for the paladin spell list. 

Preparing AND Casting Spells 

The Paladin table shows how many spell slots you have 
to cast your spells. To cast one of your paladin spells of 
1st level or higher, you must expend a slot of the spell’s 
level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when 
you finish a long rest. 

You prepare the list of paladin spells that are available 
for you to cast, choosing from the paladin spell list. 
When you do so, choose a number of paladin spells 
equal to your Charisma modifier I- half your paladin 
level, rounded down (minimum of one spell). The spells 
must be of a level for which you have spell slots. 

For example, if you are a 5th-level paladin, you have 
four Ist-level and two 2nd-level spell slots. With a 
Charisma of 14, your list of prepared spells can include 
four spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If you 
prepare the Ist-level spell cure wounds, you can cast 
it using a Ist-level or a 2nd-level slot. Casting the spell 
doesn’t remove it from your list of prepared spells. 

You can change your list of prepared spells when you 
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of paladin spells 
requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least 1 
minute per spell level for each spell on your list. 

Spellcasting Ability 

Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your paladin 
spells, since their power derives from the strength of 









your convictions. You use your Charisma whenever a 
spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you 
use your Charisma modifier when setting the saving 
throw DC for a paladin spell you cast and when making 
an attack roll with one. 

Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + 
your Charisma modifier 

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + 
your Charisma modifier 

Spellcasting Focus 

You can use a holy symbol (found in chapter 5) as a 
spellcasting focus for your paladin spells. 

Divine Smite __ 

Starting at 2nd level, when you hit a creature with a 
melee weapon attack, you can expend one paladin spell 
slot to deal radiant damage to the target, in addition to 
the weapon’s damage. The extra damage is 2d8 for a 
Ist-level spell slot, plus ld8 for each spell level higher 
than 1st, to a maximum of 5d8. The damage increases 
by ld8 if the target is an undead or a fiend. 

Divine Health 

By 3rd level, the divine magic flowing through you 
makes you immune to disease. 

Sacred Oath 

When you reach 3rd level, you swear the oath that binds 
you as a paladin forever. Up to this time you have been 
in a preparatory stage, committed to the path but not 
yet sworn to it. Now you choose the Oath of Devotion, 
the Oath of the Ancients, or the Oath of Vengeance, all 
detailed at the end of the class description. 

Your choice grants you features at 3rd level and again 
at 7th, 15th, and 20th level. Those features include oath 
spells and the Channel Divinity feature. 

Oath Spells 

Each oath has a list of associated spells. You gain 
access to these spells at the levels specified in the oath 
description. Once you gain access to an oath spell, you 
always have it prepared. Oath spells don’t count against 
the number of spells you can prepare each day. 

If you gain an oath spell that doesn’t appear on the 
paladin spell list, the spell is nonetheless a paladin 
spell for you. 

Channel Divinity 

Your oath allows you to channel divine energy to fuel 
magical effects. Each Channel Divinity option provided 
by your oath explains how to use it. 

When you use your Channel Divinity, you choose 
which option to use. You must then finish a short or long 
rest to use your Channel Divinity again. 

Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws. 
When you use such an effect from this class, the DC 
equals your paladin spell save DC. 


Ability Score Improvement 

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, 
and 19th level, you can increase one ability score of your 
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of 
your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase an ability 
score above 20 using this feature. 

Extra Attack 

Beginning at 5th level, you can attack twice, instead of 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 

Aura of Protection 

Starting at 6th level, whenever you or a friendly creature 
within 10 feet of you must make a saving throw, the 
creature gains a bonus to the saving throw equal to your 
Charisma modifier (with a minimum bonus of +1). You 
must be conscious to grant this bonus. 

At 18th level, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet. 

Aura of Courage 

Starting at 10th level, you and friendly creatures 
within 10 feet of you can’t be frightened while you 
are conscious. 

At 18th level, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet. 

Improved Divine Smite 

By 11th level, you are so suffused with righteous 
might that all your melee weapon strikes carry divine 
power with them. Whenever you hit a creature with a 
melee weapon, the creature takes an extra ld8 radiant 
damage. If you also use your Divine Smite with an 
attack, you add this damage to the extra damage of your 
Divine Smite. 

Cleansing Touch 

Beginning at 14th level, you can use your action to 
end one spell on yourself or on one willing creature 
that you touch. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal 
to your Charisma modifier (a minimum of once). You 
regain expended uses when you finish a long rest. 

Sacred Oaths 

Becoming a paladin involves taking vows that commit 
the paladin to the cause of righteousness, an active 
path of fighting wickedness. The final oath, taken 
when he or she reaches 3rd level, is the culmination 
of all the paladin’s training. Some characters with this 
class don’t consider themselves true paladins until 
they have reached 3rd level and made this oath. For 
others, the actual swearing of the oath is a formality, 
an official stamp on what has always been true in the 
paladin’s heart. 

Oath o f Devotion 

The Oath of Devotion binds a paladin to the loftiest 
ideals of justice, virtue, and order. Sometimes called 
cavaliers, white knights, or holy warriors, these 
paladins meet the ideal of the knight in shining armor. 







acting with honor in pursuit of justice and the greater 
good. They hold themselves to the highest standards of 
conduct, and some, for better or worse, hold the rest of 
the world to the same standards. Many who swear this 
oath are devoted to gods of law and good and use their 
gods’ tenets as the measure of their devotion. They hold 
angels—the perfect servants of good—as their ideals, 
and incorporate images of angelic wings into their 
helmets or coats of arms. 

Tenets of Devotion 

Though the exact words and strictures of the Oath of 
Devotion vary, paladins of this oath share these tenets. 

Honesty. Don’t lie or cheat. Let your word be 
your promise. 

Courage. Never fear to act, though caution is wise. 

Compassion. Aid others, protect the weak, and 
punish those who threaten them. Show mercy to your 
foes, but temper it with wisdom. 

Honor. Treat others with fairness, and let your 
honorable deeds be an example to them. Do as 
much good as possible while causing the least 
amount of harm. 

Duty. Be responsible for your actions and their 
consequences, protect those entrusted to your care, 
and obey those who have just authority over you. 

Oath Spells 

You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed. 

Oath of Devotion Spells 

Paladin Level Spells 

3rd protection from evil and good, sanctuary 

5th lesser restoration, zone of truth 

9th beacon of hope, dispel magic 

13th freedom of movement, guardian of faith 

17th commune, flame strike 

Channel Divinity 

When you take this oath at 3rd level, you gain the 
following two Channel Divinity options. 

Sacred Weapon. As an action, you can imbue one 
weapon that you are holding with positive energy, 
using your Channel Divinity. For 1 minute, you add 
your Charisma modifier to attack rolls made with that 
weapon (with a minimum bonus of +1). The weapon also 
emits bright light in a 20-foot radius and dim light 20 
feet beyond that. If the weapon is not already magical, it 
becomes magical for the duration. 

You can end this effect on your turn as part of any 
other action. If you are no longer holding or carrying 
this weapon, or if you fall unconscious, this effect ends. 

Turn the Unholy. As an action, you present your 
holy symbol and speak a prayer censuring fiends and 
undead, using your Channel Divinity. Each fiend or 
undead that can see or hear you within 30 feet of you 
must make a Wisdom saving throw. If the creature 
fails its saving throw, it is turned for 1 minute or until 
it takes damage. 

A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move 
as far away from you as it can, and it can’t willingly 
move to a space within 30 feet of you. It also can't take 


Breaking Your Oath 

A paladin tries to hold to the highest standards of conduct, 
but even the most virtuous paladin is fallible. Sometimes 
the right path proves too demanding, sometimes a situation 
calls for the lesser of two evils, and sometimes the heat of 
emotion causes a paladin to transgress his or her oath. 

A paladin who has broken a vow typically seeks absolution 
from a cleric who shares his or her faith or from another 
paladin of the same order. The paladin might spend an all- 
night vigil in prayer as a sign of penitence, or undertake a 
fast or similar act of self-denial. After a rite of confession and 
forgiveness, the paladin starts fresh. 

If a paladin willfully violates his or her oath and shows no 
sign of repentance, the consequences can be more serious. 

At the DM's discretion, an impenitent paladin might be 
forced to abandon this class and adopt another, or perhaps 
to take the Oathbreaker paladin option that appears in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. 

^ """ .. r 

reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action 
or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from 
moving. If there’s nowhere to move, the creature can use 
the Dodge action. 

Aura of Devotion 

Starting at 7th level, you and friendly creatures within 
10 feet of you can’t be charmed while you are conscious. 
At 18th level, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet. 

Purity of Spirit 

Beginning at 15th level, you are always under the effects 
of a protection from evil and good spell. 

Holy Nimbus 

At 20th level, as an action, you can emanate an aura of 
sunlight. For 1 minute, bright light shines from you in a 
30-foot radius, and dim light shines 30 feet beyond that. 

Whenever an enemy creature starts its turn in the 
bright light, the creature takes 10 radiant damage. 

In addition, for the duration, you have advantage on 
saving throws against spells cast by fiends or undead. 

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 

Oath of the Ancients 

The Oath of the Ancients is as old as the race of elves 
and the rituals of the druids. Sometimes called fey 
knights, green knights, or horned knights, paladins who 
swear this oath cast their lot with the side of the light 
in the cosmic struggle against darkness because they 
love the beautiful and life-giving things of the world, 
not necessarily because they believe in principles of 
honor, courage, and justice. They adorn their armor and 
clothing with images of growing things—leaves, antlers, 
or flowers—to reflect their commitment to preserving 
life and light in the world. 

Tenets of the Ancients 

The tenets of the Oath of the Ancients have been 
preserved for uncounted centuries. This oath 
emphasizes the principles of good above any concerns 
of law or chaos. Its four central principles are simple. 













Kindle the Light. Through your acts of mercy, 
kindness, and forgiveness, kindle the light of hope in the 
world, beating back despair. 

Shelter the Light. Where there is good, beauty, love, 
and laughter in the world, stand against the wickedness 
that would swallow it. Where life flourishes, stand 
against the forces that would render it barren. 

Preserve Your Own Light. Delight in song and 
laughter, in beauty and art. If you allow the light to die in 
your own heart, you can’t preserve it in the world. 

Be the Light. Be a glorious beacon for all who live in 
despair. Let the light of your joy and courage shine forth 
in all your deeds. 

Oath Spells 

You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed. 


Oath of the Ancients Spells 


Paladin Level 

Spells 

3rd 

ensnaring strike, speak with animais 

5th 

moonbeam, misty step 

9th 

plant growth, protection from energy 

13th 

ice storm, stoneskin 

17th 

commune with nature, tree stride 


Channel Divinity 

When you take this oath at 3rd level, you gain the 
following two Channel Divinity options. 

Nature’s Wrath. You can use your Channel Divinity 
to invoke primeval forces to ensnare a foe. As an action, 
you can cause spectral vines to spring up and reach 
for a creature within 10 feet of you that you can see. 

The creature must succeed on a Strength or Dexterity 
saving throw (its choice) or be restrained. While 
restrained by the vines, the creature repeats the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns. On a success, it 
frees itself and the vines vanish. 

Turn the Faithless. You can use your Channel 
Divinity to utter ancient words that are painful for fey 
and fiends to hear. As an action, you present your holy 


symbol, and each fey or fiend within 30 feet of you that 
can hear you must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a 
failed save, the creature is turned for 1 minute or until it 
takes damage. 

A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move 
as far away from you as it can, and it can’t willingly 
move to a space within 30 feet of you. It also can’t take 
reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action 
or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from 
moving. If there’s nowhere to move, the creature can use 
the Dodge action. 

If the creature’s true form is concealed by an illusion, 
shapeshifting, or other effect, that form is revealed while 
it is turned. 

Aura of Warding 

Beginning at 7th level, ancient magic lies so heavily 
upon you that it forms an eldritch ward. You and friendly 
creatures within 10 feet of you have resistance to 
damage from spells. 

At 18th level, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet. 
Undying Sentinel 

Starting at 15th level, when you are reduced to 0 hit 
points and are not killed outright, you can choose to 
drop to 1 hit point instead. Once you use this ability, you 
can’t use it again until you finish a long rest. 

Additionally, you suffer none of the drawbacks of old 
age, and you can’t be aged magically. 

Elder Champion 

At 20th level, you can assume the form of an ancient 
force of nature, taking on an appearance you choose. 

For example, your skin might turn green or take on a 
bark-like texture, your hair might become leafy or moss¬ 
like, or you might sprout antlers or a lion-like mane. 

Using your action, you undergo a transformation. 

For 1 minute, you gain the following benefits: 

• At the start of each of your turns, you regain 10 hit 
points. 

• Whenever you cast a paladin spell that has a casting 
time of 1 action, you can cast it using a bonus action 
instead. 

• Enemy creatures within 10 feet of you have disadvan¬ 
tage on saving throws against your paladin spells and 
Channel Divinity options. 

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 

Oath of Vengeance_ 

The Oath of Vengeance is a solemn commitment to 
punish those who have committed a grievous sin. When 
evil forces slaughter helpless villagers, when an entire 
people turns against the will of the gods, when a thieves’ 
guild grows too violent and powerful, when a dragon 
rampages through the countryside—at times like these, 
paladins arise and swear an Oath of Vengeance to set 
right that which has gone wrong. To these paladins— 
sometimes called avengers or dark knights—their own 
purity is not as important as delivering justice. 











Tenets of Vengeance 

The tenets of the Oath of Vengeance vary by paladin, but 
all the tenets revolve around punishing wrongdoers by 
any means necessary. Paladins who uphold these tenets 
are willing to sacrifice even their own righteousness to 
mete out justice upon those who do evil, so the paladins 
are often neutral or lawful neutral in alignment. The 
core principles of the tenets are brutally simple. 

Fight the Greater Evil. Faced with a choice of fighting 
my sworn foes or combating a lesser evil. I choose the 
greater evil. 

No Mercy for the Wicked. Ordinary foes might win 
my mercy, but my sworn enemies do not. 

By Any Means Necessary. My qualms can’t get in the 
way of exterminating my foes. 

Restitution. If my foes wreak ruin on the world, it is 
because I failed to stop them. I must help those harmed 
by their misdeeds. 

Oath Spells 

You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed. 


Channel Divinity 

When you take this oath at 3rd level, you gain the 
following two Channel Divinity options. 

Abjure Enemy. As an action, you present your holy 
symbol and speak a prayer of denunciation, using your 
Channel Divinity. Choose one creature within 60 feet 
of you that you can see. That creature must make a 
Wisdom saving throw, unless it is immune to being 
frightened. Fiends and undead have disadvantage on 
this saving throw. 

On a failed save, the creature is frightened for 1 
minute or until it takes any damage. While frightened, 
the creature’s speed is 0, and it can’t benefit from any 
bonus to its speed. 

On a successful save, the creature’s speed is halved 
for 1 minute or until the creature takes any damage. 

Vow of Enmity. As a bonus action, you can utter a vow 
of enmity against a creature you can see within 10 feet 
of you, using your Channel Divinity. You gain advantage 
on attack rolls against the creature for 1 minute or until 
it drops to 0 hit points or falls unconscious. 


Oath of Vengeance Spells 


Paladin Level 

Spells 

3rd 

bane, hunter's mark 

5th 

hold person, misty step 

9th 

haste, protection from energy 

13th 

banishment, dimension door 

17th 

hold monster, scrying 



Relentless Avenger 

By 7th level, your supernatural focus helps you close 
off a foe’s retreat. When you hit a creature with an 
opportunity attack, you can move up to half your 
speed immediately after the attack and as part of 
the same reaction. This movement doesn’t provoke 
opportunity attacks. 

Soul of Vengeance 

Starting at 15th level, the authority with which you 
speak your Vow of Enmity gives you greater power over 
your foe. When a creature under the effect of your Vow 
of Enmity makes an attack, you can use your reaction to 
make a melee weapon attack against that creature if it is 
within range. 

Avenging Angel 

At 20th level, you can assume the form of an 
angelic avenger. Using your action, you undergo a 
transformation. For 1 hour, you gain the following 
benefits: 

• Wings sprout from your back and grant you a flying 
speed of 60 feet. 

• You emanate an aura of menace in a 30-foot radius. 
The first time any enemy creature enters the aura or 
starts its turn there during a battle, the creature must 
succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or become fright¬ 
ened of you for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. 
Attack rolls against the frightened creature have 
advantage. 

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 










































The Ranger 


Level 

Proficiency 

Bonus 

Features 

Spells 

Known 

1st 

—Spell Slots per Sf 

2nd 3rd 

)ell Level— 

4th 

5th 

1st 

4-2 

Favored Enemy, Natural Explorer 

— 

— 

— 


2nd 

42 

Fighting Style, Spellcasting 

2 

2 

— 

3rd 

42 

Ranger Archetype, Primeval Awareness 

3 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

4th 

42 

Ability Score Improvement 

3 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

5th 

43 

Extra Attack 

4 

4 

2 

— 

— 

— 

6th 

43 

Favored Enemy and Natural Explorer improvements 

4 

4 

2 

— 

— 

— 

7th 

43 

Ranger Archetype feature 

5 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

8th 

43 

Ability Score Improvement, Land's Stride 

5 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

9th 

44 

— 

6 

4 

3 

2 

— 

— 

10th 

44 

Natural Explorer improvement, Hide in Plain Sight 

6 

4 

3 

2 

— 

— 

11th 

44 

Ranger Archetype feature 

7 

4 

3 

3 

— 

— 

12th 

44 

Ability Score Improvement 

7 

4 

3 

3 

— 

— 

13th 

45 

— 

8 

4 

3 

3 

1 

— 

14th 

45 

Favored Enemy improvement, Vanish 

8 

4 

3 

3 

1 

— 

15th 

45 

Ranger Archetype feature 

9 

4 

3 

3 

2 

— 

16th 

45 

Ability Score Improvement 

9 

4 

3 

3 

2 

— 

17th 

46 

— 

10 

4 

3 

3 

3 

1 

18th 

46 

Feral Senses 

10 

4 

3 

3 

3 

1 

19th 

46 

Ability Score Improvement 

11 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

20th 

46 

Foe Slayer 

11 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 






mixture of amusement, frustration, and compassion. 

But they quickly learn that other adventurers who can 
carry their own weight in a fight against civilization’s 
foes are worth any extra burden. Coddled city folk might 
not know how to feed themselves or find fresh water in 
the wild, but they make up for it in other ways. 

Creating a Ranger 


What made you join up with a band of adventurers? 

Do you find it challenging to teach new allies the ways 
of the wild, or do you welcome the relief from solitude 
that they offer? 

Quick Build 

You can make a ranger quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, make Dexterity yo’ur highest ability 
score, followed by Wisdom. (Some rangers who focus 
on two-weapon fighting make Strength higher than 
Dexterity.) Second, choose the outlander background. 

Class Features 

As a ranger, you gain the following class features. 


As you create your ranger character, consider the nature 
of the training that gave you your particular capabilities. 
Did you train with a single mentor, wandering the wilds 
together until you mastered the ranger’s ways? Did you 
leave your apprenticeship, or was your mentor slain^ 
perhaps by the same kind of monster that became your 
favored enemy? Or perhaps you learned your skills as 
part of a band of rangers affiliated with a druidic circle, 
trained in mystic paths as well as wilderness lore. You 
might be self-taught, a recluse who learned combat 
skills, tracking, and even a magical connection to nature 
through the necessity of surviving in the wilds. 

What’s the source of your particular hatred of a 
certain kind of enemy? Did a monster kill someone 
you loved or destroy your home village? Or did you see 
too much of the destruction these monsters cause and 
commit yourself to reining in their depredations? Is 
your adventuring career a continuation of your work 
in protecting the borderlands, or a significant change? 


Hit Points 

Hit Dice: IdlO per ranger level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 10 + your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: IdlO (or 6) + your 
Constitution modifier per ranger level after 1st 

Proficiencies 

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields 
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons 
Tools: None 

Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity 
Skills: Choose three from Animal Handling, 

Athletics, Insight, Investigation, Nature, Perception, 
Stealth, and Survival 

Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 






















J 


(a) scale mail or (fe) leather armor 

• (a) two shortswords or (h) two simple melee weapons 

• (a) a dungeoneer’s pack or (h) an explorer’s pack 

• A longbow and a quiver of 20 arrows 

Favored Enemy 

Beginning at 1st level, you have significant experience 
studying, tracking, hunting, and even talking to a certain 
type of enemy. 

Choose a type of favored enemy: aberrations, 
beasts, celestials, constructs, dragons, elementals, fey, 
fiends, giants, monstrosities, oozes, plants, or undead. 
Alternatively, you can select two races of humanoid 
(such as gnolls and ores) as favored enemies. 

You have advantage on Wisdom (Survival) checks to 
track your favored enemies, as well as on Intelligence 
checks to recall information about them. 

When you gain this feature, you also learn one 
language of your choice that is spoken by your favored 
enemies, if they speak one at all. 

You choose one additional favored enemy, as well as 
an associated language, at 6th and 14th level. As you 
gain levels, your choices should reflect the types of 
monsters you have encountered on your adventures. 

Natural Explorer 

You are particularly familiar with one type of natural 
environment and are adept at traveling and surviving in 
such regions. Choose one type of favored terrain: arctic, 
coast, desert, forest, grassland, mountain, swamp, 
or the Underdark. When you make an Intelligence or 
Wisdom check related to your favored terrain, your 
proficiency bonus is doubled if you are using a skill that 
you’re proficient in. 

While traveling for an hour or more in your favored 
terrain, you gain the following benefits: 

• Difficult terrain doesn’t slow your group’s travel. 

• Your group can’t become lost except by magical 
means. 

• Even when you are engaged in another activity while 
traveling (such as foraging, navigating, or tracking), 
you remain alert to danger. 

• If you are traveling alone, you can move stealthily at 
a normal pace. 

• When you forage, you find twice as much food as you 
normally would. 

• While tracking other creatures, you also learn their 
exact number, their sizes, and how long ago they 
passed through the area. 

You choose additional favored terrain types at 6th 
and 10th level. 

Fighting Style 

At 2nd level, you adopt a particular style of fighting as 
your specialty. Choose one of the following options. 

You can’t take a Fighting Style option more than once, 
even if you later get to choose again. 


Archery 

You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with 
ranged weapons. 

Defense 

While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to AC. 

Dueling 

When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and 
no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls 
with that weapon. 

Two-Weapon Fighting 

When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can add 
your ability modifier to the damage of the second attack. 

Spellcasting 

By the time you reach 2nd level, you have learned to 
use the magical essence of nature to cast spells, much 
as a druid does. See chapter 10 for the general rules of 
spellcasting and chapter 11 for the ranger spell list. 

Spell Slots 

The Ranger table shows how many spell slots you have 
to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of 
these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level 
or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you 
finish a long rest. 

For example, if you know the Ist-level spell animal 
friendship and have a Ist-level and a 2nd-level spell slot 
available, you can cast animal friendship using either slot. 

Spells Known of 1st Level and Higher 

You know two Ist-level spells of your choice from the 
ranger spell list. 

The Spells Known column of the Ranger table shows 
when you learn more ranger spells of your choice. Each 
of these spells must be of a level for which you have 




b' 








V 




V. 




spell slots. For instance, when you reach 5th level in this 
class, you can learn one new spell of 1st or 2nd level. 

Additionally, when you gain a level in this class, 
you can choose one of the ranger spells you know 
and replace it with another spell from the ranger 
spell list, which also must be of a level for which you 
have spell slots. 

Spellgasting Ability 
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your ranger 
spells, since your magic draws on your attunement to 
nature. You use your Wisdom whenever a spell refers 
to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your 
Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw DC for 
a ranger spell you cast and when making an attack roll 
with one. 

Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + 
your Wisdom modifier 

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + 
your Wisdom modifier 

Ranger Archetype 

At 3rd level, you choose an archetype that you strive 
to emulate: Hunter or Beast Master, both detailed at 
the end of the class description. Your choice grants 
you features at 3rd level and again at 7th, 11th, 
and 15th level. 

Primeval Awareness 

Beginning at 3rd level, you can use your action and 
expend one ranger spell slot to focus your awareness on 
the region around you. For 1 minute per level of the spell 
slot you expend, you can sense whether the following 
types of creatures are present within 1 mile of you (or 
within up to 6 miles if you are in your favored terrain): 
aberrations, celestials, dragons, elementals, fey, fiends, 
and undead. This feature doesn’t reveal the creatures’ 
location or number. 



Ability Score Improvement 

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, 
and 19th level, you can increase one ability score of your 
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of 
your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase an ability 
score above 20 using this feature. 

Extra Attack 

Beginning at 5th level, you can attack twice, instead of 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 

La nd’s Stride 

Starting at 8th level, moving through nonmagical 
difficult terrain costs you no extra movement. You can 
also pass through nonmagical plants without being 
slowed by them and without taking damage from them if 
they have thorns, spines, or a similar hazard. 

In addition, you have advantage on saving throws 
against plants that are magically created or manipulated 
to impede movement, such those created by the 
entangle spell. 

Hide in Plain Sight 

Starting at 10th level, you can spend 1 minute creating 
camouflage for yourself. You must have access to fresh 
mud, dirt, plants, soot, and other naturally occurring 
materials with which to create your camouflage. 

Once you are camouflaged in this way, you can try 
to hide by pressing yourself up against a solid surface, 
such as a tree or wall, that is at least as tall and wide 
as you are. You gain a +10 bonus to Dexterity (Stealth) 
checks as long as you remain there without moving or 
taking actions. Once you move or take an action or a 
reaction, you must camouflage yourself again to gain 
this benefit. 

Vanish 

Starting at 14th level, you can use the Hide action as a 
bonus action on your turn. Also, you can't be tracked by 
nonmagical means, unless you choose to leave a trail. 

Feral Senses 

At 18th level, you gain preternatural senses that help 
you fight creatures you can’t see. When you attack a 
creature you can’t see, your inability to see it doesn’t 
impose disadvantage on your attack rolls against it. 

You are also aware of the location of any invisible 
creature within 30 feet of you, provided that the 
creature isn’t hidden from you and you aren’t 
blinded or deafened. 

Foe Slayer 

At 20th level, you become an unparalleled hunter of your 
enemies. Once on each of your turns, you can add your 
Wisdom modifier to the attack roll or the damage roll of 
an attack you make against one of your favored enemies. 
You can choose to use this feature before or after the 
roll, but before any effects of the roll are applied. 










Ranger Archetypes 

The ideal of the ranger has two classic expressions: the 
Hunter and the Beast Master. 

Hunter 

Emulating the Hunter archetype means accepting your 
place as a bulwark between civilization and the terrors 
of the wilderness. As you walk the Hunter’s path, you 
learn specialized techniques for fighting the threats 
you face, from rampaging ogres and hordes of ores to 
towering giants and terrifying dragons. 

Hunter’s Prey 

At 3rd level, you gain one of the following features 
of your choice. 

Colossus Slayer. Your tenacity can wear down 
the most potent foes. When you hit a creature with a 
weapon attack, the creature takes an extra ld8 damage 
if it’s below its hit point maximum. You can deal this 
extra damage only once per turn. 

Giant Killer. When a Large or larger creature within 
5 feet of you hits or misses you with an attack, you can 
use your reaction to attack that creature immediately 
after its attack, provided that you can see the creature. 

Horde Breaker. Once on each of your turns when you 
make a weapon attack, you can make another attack 
with the same weapon against a different creature that 
is within 5 feet of the original target and within range 
of your weapon. 

Defensive Tactics 

At 7th level, you gain one of the following features 
of your choice. 

Escape the Horde. Opportunity attacks against you 
are made with disadvantage. 

Multiattack Defense. When a creature hits you 
with an attack, you gain a +4 bonus to AC against 
all subsequent attacks made by that creature for the 
rest of the turn. 

Steel Will. You have advantage on saving throws 
against being frightened. 

Multi ATTACK 

At 11th level, you gain one of the following features 
of your choice. 

Volley. You can use your action to make a ranged 
attack against any number of creatures within 10 feet 
of a point you can see within your weapon’s range. You 
must have ammunition for each target, as normal, and 
you make a separate attack roll for each target. 

Whirlwind Attack. You can use your action to make a 
melee attack against any number of creatures within 5 
feet of you, with a separate attack roll for each target. 

Superior Hunter’s Defense 

At 15th level, you gain one of the following features 
of your choice. 

Evasion. You can nimbly dodge out of the way of 
certain area effects, such as a red dragon’s fiery breath 
or a lightning bolt spell. When you are subjected to an 
effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw 
to take only half damage, you instead take no damage 


if you succeed on the saving throw, and only half 
damage if you fail. 

Stand Against the Tide. When a hostile creature 
misses you with a melee attack, you can use your reaction 
to force that creature to repeat the same attack against 
another creature (other than itself) of your choice. 

Uncanny Dodge. When an attacker that you can see 
hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to 
halve the attack’s damage against you. 

Beast Master 

The Beast Master archetype embodies a friendship 
between the civilized races and the beasts of the world. 
United in focus, beast and ranger work as one to fight 
the monstrous foes that threaten civilization and the 
wilderness alike. Emulating the Beast Master archetype 
means committing yourself to this ideal, working in 
partnership with an animal as its companion and friend. 

Ranger’s Companion 

At 3rd level, you gain a beast companion that 
accompanies you on your adventures and is trained to 
fight alongside you. Choose a beast that is no larger than 
Medium and that has a challenge rating of 1/4 or lower 
(appendix D presents statistics for the hawk, mastiff, 
and panther as examples). Add your proficiency bonus 
to the beast’s AC, attack rolls, and damage rolls, as well 
as to any saving throws and skills it is proficient in. Its 
hit point maximum equals its normal maximum or four 
times your ranger level, whichever is higher. 

The beast obeys your commands as best as it can. It 
takes its turn on your initiative, though it doesn’t take an 
action unless you command it to. On your turn, you can 
verbally command the beast where to move (no action 
required by you). You can use your action to verbally 
command it to take the Attack, Dash, Disengage, Dodge, 
or Help action. Once you have the Extra Attack feature, 
you can make one weapon attack yourself when you 
command the beast to take the Attack action. 

While traveling through your favored terrain with only 
the beast, you can move stealthily at a normal pace. 

If the beast dies, you can obtain another one by 
spending 8 hours magically bonding with another beast 
that isn’t hostile to you, either the same type of beast as 
before or a different one. 

Exceptional Training 

Beginning at 7th level, on any of your turns when 
your beast companion doesn’t attack, you can use a 
bonus action to command the beast to take the Dash, 
Disengage, Dodge, or Help action on its turn. 

Bestial Fury 

Starting at 11th level, your beast companion can 
make two attacks when you command it to use the 
Attack action. 

Share Spells 

Beginning at 15th level, when you cast a spell targeting 
yourself, you can also affect your beast companion with 
the spell if the beast is within 30 feet of you. 
















































The Rogue 


Level 

Proficiency 

Bonus 

Sneak 

Attack 

Features 

1st 

+2 

ld6 

Expertise, Sneak Attack, 
Thieves’ Cant 

2nd 

+2 

ld6 

Cunning Action 

3rd 

+2 

2d 6 

Roguish Archetype 

4th 

+2 

2d6 

Ability Score Improvement 

5th 

+3 

3d6 

Uncanny Dodge 

6th 

+3 

3d6 

Expertise 

7th 

+3 

4d6 

Evasion 

8th 

+3 

4d6 

Ability Score Improvement 

9th 

+4 

5d6 

Roguish Archetype feature 

10th 

+4 

5d6 

Ability Score Improvement 

11th 

+4 

6d6 

Reliable Talent 

12th 

+4 

6d6 

Ability Score Improvement 

13th 

+5 

7d6 

Roguish Archetype feature 

14th 

-1-5 

7d6 

Blindsense 

15th 

-1-5 

8d6 

Slippery Mind 

16th 

-1-5 

8d6 

Ability Score Improvement 

17th 

+6 

9d6 

Roguish Archetype feature 

18th 

+6 

9d6 

Elusive 

19th 

+6 

10d6 

Ability Score Improvement 

20th 

+6 

10d6 

Stroke of Luck 


locksmiths, investigators, or exterminators, which can 
be a dangerous job in a world where dire rats—and 
wererats—haunt the sewers. 

As adventurers, rogues fall on both sides of the law. 
Some are hardened criminals who decide to seek 
their fortune in treasure hoards, while others take up 
a life of adventure to escape from the law. Some have 
learned and perfected their skills with the explicit 
purpose of infiltrating ancient ruins and hidden crypts 
in search of treasure. 



Quick Build 

You can make a rogue quickly by following 
these suggestions. First. Dexterity should 
be your highest ability score. Make 
Intelligence your next-highest if you want to 
excel at Investigation or plan to take up the 
Arcane Trickster archetype. Choose Charisma 
instead if you plan to emphasize deception and social 
interaction. Second, choose the charlatan background. 



Creating a Rogue 

As you create your rogue character, consider the 
character’s relationship to the law. Do you have a 
criminal past—or present? Are you on the run from the 
law or from an angry thieves’ guild master? Or did you 
leave your guild in search of bigger risks and bigger 
rewards? Is it greed that drives you in your adventures, 
or some other desire or ideal? 

What was the trigger that led you away from your 
previous life? Did a great con or heist gone terribly 
wrong cause you to reevaluate your career? Maybe 
you were lucky and a successful robbery gave you the 
coin you needed to escape the squalor of your life. 

Did wanderlust finally call you away from your home? 
Perhaps you suddenly found yourself cut off from your 
family or your mentor, and you had to find a new means 
of support. Or maybe you made a new friend—another 
member of your adventuring party—who showed you 
new possibilities for earning a living and employing 
your particular talents. 


Class Features 

As a rogue, you have the following class features. 

Hit Points 

Hit Dice: ld8 per rogue level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 -i- your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: ld8 (or 5) ^ your 
Constitution modifier per rogue level after 1st 

Proficiencies 

Armor: Light armor 

Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows, 
longswords, rapiers, shortswords 
Tools: Thieves’ tools 

Saving Throws: Dexterity. Intelligence 
Skills: Choose four from Acrobatics, Athletics. 
Deception. Insight, Intimidation, Investigation, 
Perception. Performance. Persuasion, Sleight of 
Hand, and Stealth 

















Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 

• (a) a rapier or ib) a shortsword 

• (a) a shortbow and quiver of 20 arrows or (b) a 
shortsword 

• (a) a burglar’s pack, (b) a dungeoneer’s pack, or (c) an 
explorer’s pack 

• Leather armor, two daggers, and thieves’ tools 


people in an area are easy marks or will provide a safe 
house for thieves on the run. 

Gunning Action 

Starting at 2nd level, your quick thinking and agility 
allow you to move and act quickly. You can take a 
bonus action on each of your turns in combat. This 
action can be used only to take the Dash, Disengage, 
or Hide action. 

Roguish Archetype 

At 3rd level, you choose an archetype that you emulate 
in the exercise of your rogue abilities: Thief, Assassin, 
or Arcane Trickster, all detailed at the end of the class 
description. Your archetype choice grants you features 
at 3rd level and then again at 9th, 13th, and 17th level. 

Ability Score Improvement 

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 10th, 12th, 
16th, and 19th level, you can increase one ability score 
of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability 
scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase 
an ability score above 20 using this feature. 


Expertise 


Uncanny Dodge 


At 1st level, choose two of your skill proficiencies, or 
one of your skill proficiencies and your proficiency with 
thieves’ tools. Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any 
ability check you make that uses either of the chosen 
proficiencies. 

At 6th level, you can choose two more of your 
proficiencies (in skills or with thieves’ tools) to gain 
this benefit. 

Sneak Attack 

Beginning at 1st level, you know how to strike subtly 
and exploit a foe’s distraction. Once per turn, you can 
deal an extra ld6 damage to one creature you hit with 
an attack if you have advantage on the attack roll. The 
attack must use a finesse or a ranged weapon. 

You don’t need advantage on the attack roll if another 
enemy of the target is within 5 feet of it, that enemy 
isn’t incapacitated, and you don’t have disadvantage on 
the attack roll. 

The amount of the extra damage increases as you 
gain levels in this class, as shown in the Sneak Attack 
column of the Rogue table. 

Thieves’ Gant 


Starting at 5th level, when an attacker that you can see 
hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to 
halve the attack’s damage against you. 

Evasion 

Beginning at 7th level, you can nimbly dodge out of the 
way of certain area effects, such as a red dragon’s fiery 
breath or an ice storm spell. When you are subjected 
to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving 
throw to take only half damage, you instead take no 
damage if you succeed on the saving throw, and only 
half damage if you fail. 

Reliable Talent 

By 11th level, you have refined your chosen skills until 
they approach perfection. Whenever you make an ability 
check that lets you add your proficiency bonus, you can 
treat a d20 roll of 9 or lower as a 10. 

Blindsense 

Starting at 14th level, if you are able to hear, you are 
aware of the location of any hidden or invisible creature 
within 10 feet of you. 


During your rogue training you learned thieves’ cant, a 
secret mix of dialect, jargon, and code that allows you to 
hide messages in seemingly normal conversation. Only 
another creature that knows thieves’ cant understands 
such messages. It takes four times longer to convey such 
a message than it does to speak the same idea plainly. 

In addition, you understand a set of secret signs and 
symbols used to convey short, simple messages, such 
as whether an area is dangerous or the territory of a 
thieves’ guild, whether loot is nearby, or whether the 


Slippery Mind 

By 15th level, you have acquired greater mental 
strength. You gain proficiency in Wisdom saving throws. 

Elusive 

Beginning at 18th level, you are so evasive that 
attackers rarely gain the upper hand against you. No 
attack roll has advantage against you while you aren’t 
incapacitated. 


Stroke of Luck 

At 20th level, you have an uncanny knack for succeeding 
when you need to. If your attack misses a target within 
range, you can turn the miss into a hit. Alternatively, if 
you fail an ability check, you can treat the d20 roll as a 20. 

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 

Roguish Archetypes 

Rogues have many features in common, including their 
emphasis on perfecting their skills, their precise and 
deadly approach to combat, and their increasingly quick 
reflexes. But different rogues steer those talents in 
varying directions, embodied by the rogue archetypes. 
Your choice of archetype is a reflection of your focus— 
not necessarily an indication of your chosen profession, 
but a description of your preferred techniques. 

Thief 

You hone your skills in the larcenous arts. Burglars, 
bandits, cutpurses, and other criminals typically follow 
this archetype, but so do rogues who prefer to think of 
themselves as professional treasure seekers, explorers, 
delvers, and investigators. In addition to improving your 
agility and stealth, you learn skills useful for delving into 
ancient ruins, reading unfamiliar languages, and using 
magic items you normally couldn’t employ. 

Fast Hands 

Starting at 3rd level, you can use the bonus action 
granted by your Cunning Action to make a Dexterity 
(Sleight of Hand) check, use your thieves’ tools to 
disarm a trap or open a lock, or take the Use an 
Object action. 

Second-Story Work 

When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you gain 
the ability to climb faster than normal; climbing no 
longer costs you extra movement. 

In addition, when you make a running jump, the 
distance you cover increases by a number of feet equal 
to your Dexterity modifier. 

Supreme Sneak 

Starting at 9th level, you have advantage on a Dexterity 
(Stealth) check if you move no more than half your 
speed on the same turn. 

Use Magic Device 

By 13th level, you have learned enough about the 
workings of magic that you can improvise the use of 
items even when they are not intended for you. You 
ignore all class, race, and level requirements on the use 
of magic items. 

Thief’s Reflexes 

When you reach 17th level, you have become adept at 
laying ambushes and quickly escaping danger. You can 
take two turns during the first round of any combat. You 
take your first turn at your normal initiative and your 


second turn at your initiative minus 10. You can't use 
this feature when you are surprised. 

Assassin 

You focus your training on the grim art of death. Those 
who adhere to this archetype are diverse: hired killers, 
spies, bounty hunters, and even specially anointed 
priests trained to exterminate the enemies of their deity. 
Stealth, poison, and disguise help you eliminate your 
foes with deadly efficiency. 

Bonus Proficiencies 

When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency with the disguise kit and the poisoner’s kit. 

Assassinate 

Starting at 3rd level, you are at your deadliest when you 
get the drop on your enemies. You have advantage on 
attack rolls against any creature that hasn’t taken a turn 
in the combat yet. In addition, any hit you score against 
a creature that is surprised is a critical hit. 

Infiltration Expertise 
Starting at 9th level, you can unfailingly create false 
identities for yourself. You must spend seven days and 
25 gp to establish the history, profession, and affiliations 
for an identity. You can’t establish an identity that 
belongs to someone else. For example, you might acquire 
appropriate clothing, letters of introduction, and official¬ 
looking certification to establish yourself as a member of 
a trading house from a remote city so you can insinuate 
yourself into the company of other wealthy merchants. 

Thereafter, if you adopt the new identity as a disguise, 
other creatures believe you to be that person until given 
an obvious reason not to. 

Impostor 

At 13th level, you gain the ability to unerringly mimic 
another person’s speech, writing, and behavior. 

You must spend at least three hours studying 
these three components of the person’s behavior, 
listening to speech, examining handwriting, and 
observing mannerisms. 

Your ruse is indiscernible to the casual observer. If a 
wary creature suspects something is amiss, you have 
advantage on any Charisma (Deception) check you make 
to avoid detection. 

Death Strike 

Starting at 17th level, you become a master of instant 
death. When you attack and hit a creature that is 
surprised, it must make a Constitution saving throw 
(DC 8 + your Dexterity modifier -i- your proficiency 
bonus). On a failed save, double the damage of your 
attack against the creature. 

Arcane Trickster 

Some rogues enhance their fine-honed skills of stealth 
and agility with magic, learning tricks of enchantment 
and illusion. These rogues include pickpockets and 
burglars, but also pranksters, mischief-makers, and a 
significant number of adventurers. 


Spellcasting 

When you reach 3rd level, you gain the ability to 
cast spells. See chapter 10 for the general rules of 
spellcasting and chapter 11 for the wizard spell list. 

Cantrips. You learn three cantrips: mage hand and 
two other cantrips of your choice from the wizard spell 
list. You learn another wizard cantrip of your choice 
at 10th level. 

Spelt Slots. The Arcane Trickster Spellcasting 
table shows how many spell slots you have to cast 
your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of these 
spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level or 
higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you 
finish a long rest. 

For example, if you know the Ist-level spell charm 
person and have a Ist-level and a 2nd-level spell slot 
available, you can cast charm person using either slot. 

Spells Known oflst-Level and Higher. You know 
three Ist-level wizard spells of your choice, two of which 
you must choose from the enchantment and illusion 
spells on the wizard spell list. 

The Spells Known column of the Arcane Trickster 
Spellcasting table shows when you learn more wizard 
spells of 1st level or higher. Each of these spells must 
be an enchantment or illusion spell of your choice, and 
must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For 
instance, when you reach 7th level in this class, you can 
learn one new spell of 1st or 2nd level. 

The spells you learn at 8th, 14th, and 20th level can 
come from any school of magic. 

Whenever you gain a level in this class, you can 
replace one of the wizard spells you know with another 
spell of your choice from the wizard spell list. The 
new spell must be of a level for which you have spell 
slots, and it must be an enchantment or illusion spell, 
unless you’re replacing the spell you gained at 8th, 14th. 
or 20th level. 

Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting 
ability for your wizard spells, since you learn your 
spells through dedicated study and memorization. 

You use your Intelligence whenever a spell refers to 
your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your 
Intelligence modifier when setting the saving throw 
DC for a wizard spell you cast and when making an 
attack roll with one. 

Spell save DC = 8 4- your proficiency bonus + 
your Intelligence modifier 

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus -i- 
your Intelligence modifier 

Mage Hand Legerdemain 

Starting at 3rd level, when you cast mage hand, you can 
make the spectral hand invisible, and you can perform 
the following additional tasks with it: 

• You can stow one object the hand is holding in a 
container worn or carried by another creature. 

• You can retrieve an object in a container worn or 
carried by another creature. 

• You can use thieves’ tools to pick locks and disarm 
traps at range. 


Arcane Trickster Spellcasting 


Rogue 

Cantrips 

Spells 

—Spell Slots per Spell Level— 

Level 

Known 

Known 

1st 

2nd 

3rd 

4th 

3rd 

3 

3 

2 

— 

— 


4th 

3 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

5th 

3 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

6th 

3 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

7th 

3 

5 

4 

2 

— 

— 

8th 

3 

6 

4 

2 

— 

— 

9th 

3 

6 

4 

2 

— 

— 

10 th 

4 

7 

4 

3 

— 

— 

nth 

4 

8 

4 

3 

— 

— 

12th 

4 

8 

4 

3 

— 

— 

13th 

4 

9 

4 

3 

2 

— 

14th 

4 

10 

4 

3 

2 

— 

15th 

4 

10 

4 

3 

2 

— 

16th 

4 

11 

4 

3 

3 

— 

17th 

4 

11 

4 

3 

3 

— 

18th 

4 

11 

4 

3 

3 

— 

19th 

4 

12 

4 

3 

3 

1 

20th 

4 

13 

4 

3 

3 

1 


You can perform one of these tasks without being 
noticed by a creature if you succeed on a Dexterity 
(Sleight of Hand) check contested by the creature’s 
Wisdom (Perception) check. 

In addition, you can use the bonus action granted by 
your Cunning Action to control the hand. 

Magical Ambush 

Starting at 9th level, if you are hidden from a 
creature when you cast a spell on it, the creature has 
disadvantage on any saving throw it makes against the 
spell this turn. 

Versatile Trickster 

At 13th level, you gain the ability to distract targets with 
your mage hand. As a bonus action on your turn, you can 
designate a creature within 5 feet of the spectral hand 
created by the spell. Doing so gives you advantage on 
attack rolls against that creature until the end of the turn. 

Spell Thief 

At 17th level, you gain the ability to. magically 
steal the knowledge of how to cast a spell from 
another spellcaster. 

Immediately after a creature casts a spell that targets 
you or includes you in its area of effect, you can use your 
reaction to force the creature to make a saving throw 
with its spellcasting ability modifier. The DC equals 
your spell save DC. On a failed save, you negate the 
spell’s effect against you, and you steal the knowledge 
of the spell if it is at least 1st level and of a level you can 
cast (it doesn’t need to be a wizard spell). For the next 
8 hours, you know the spell and can cast it using your 
spell slots. The creature can’t cast that spell until the 
8 hours have passed. 

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 




Sorcerer 


Golden eyes flashing, a human 
stretches out her hand and unleashes 
the dragonfire that burns in her veins. 

As an inferno rages around her foes, 
leathery wings spread from her back and 
she takes to the air. ' 

Long hair whipped by a conjured wind, 
a half-elf spreads his arms wide and throws 
his head back. Lifting him momentarily off 
the ground, a wave of magic surges up in him, 
through him, and out from him in a mighty blast 
of lightning. 

Crouching behind a stalagmite, a halfling points a 
finger at a charging troglodyte. A blast of fire springs 
from her finger to strike the creature. She ducks back 
behind the rock formation with a grin, unaware that her 
wild magic has turned her skin bright blue. 

Sorcerers carry a magical birthright conferred 
upon them by an exotic bloodline, some otherworldly 
influence, or exposure to unknown cosmic forces. 

One can’t study sorcery as one learns a language, any 
more than one can learn to live a legendary life. No one 
chooses sorcery; the power chooses the sorcerer. 


Unexplained Powers 


Raw Magic 

Magic is a part of every sorcerer, suffusing body, mind, 
and spirit with a latent power that waits to be tapped. 
Some sorcerers wield magic that springs from an 
ancient bloodline infused with the magic of dragons. 
Others carry a raw, uncontrolled magic within them, 
a chaotic storm that manifests in unexpected ways. 

The appearance of sorcerous powers is wildly 
unpredictable. Some draconic bloodlines produce 
exactly one sorcerer in every generation, but in other 
lines of descent every individual is a sorcerer. Most 
of the time, the talents of sorcery appear as apparent 
flukes. Some sorcerers can’t name the origin of their 
power, while others trace it to strange events in their 
own lives. The touch of a demon, the blessing of a 
dryad at a baby’s birth, or a taste of the water from 
a mysterious spring might spark the gift of sorcery. 

So too might the gift of a deity of magic, exposure 
to the elemental forces of the Inner Planes or the 
maddening chaos of Limbo, or a glimpse into the 
inner workings of reality. 

Sorcerers have no use for the spellbooks and ancient 
tomes of magic lore that wizards rely on, nor do they 
rely on a patron to grant their spells as warlocks do. 

By learning to harness and channel their own inborn 
magic, they can discover new and staggering ways 
to unleash that power. 


Sorcerers are rare in the world, and it’s unusual to find 
a sorcerer who is not involved in the adventuring life 
in some way. People with magical power seething in 
their veins soon discover that the power doesn’t like to 
stay quiet. A sorcerer’s magic wants to be wielded, and 
it has a tendency to spill out in unpredictable ways if 
it isn’t called on. 









The Sorcerer 


Proficiency Sorcery 


Cantrips Speils 


—Speii Slots per Spell Level— 


H 




Level 

Bonus 

Points 

Features 

Known 

Known 

1st 

2nd 

3rd 

4th 

5th 

6th 

7th 

8th 

9t 

1st 

+2 


Spellcasting, Sorcerous 
Origin 

4 

2 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

2nd 

+2 

2 

Font of Magic 

4 

3 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

- 

3rd 

+2 

3 

Metamagic 

4 

4 

4 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

- 

4th 

+2 

4 

Ability Score Improvement 

5 

5 

4 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

- 

5th 

+3 

5 

— 

5 

6 

4 

3 

2 

— 

— 

__ 

— 

— 

_ 

6th 

+3 

6 

Sorcerous Origin feature 

5 

7 

4 

3 

3 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

- 

7th 

+3 

7 

— 

5 

8 

4 

3 

3 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

- 

8th 

+3 

8 

Ability Score Improvement 

5 

9 

4 

3 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

9th 

+4 

9 

— 

5 

10 

4 

3 

3 

3 

1 

— 

— 

— 

- 

10th 

+4 

10 

Metamagic 

6 

11 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

— 

— 

— 

- 

nth 

+4 

11 

— 

6 

12 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

— 

— 

— 

12th 

+4 

12 

Ability Score Improvement 

6 

12 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

— 

— 

- 

13th 

+5 

13 

— 

6 

13 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

— 

— 

14th 

+5 

14 

Sorcerous Origin feature 

6 

13 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

— 

— 

15th 

+5 

15 

— 

6 

14 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

— 

16th 

+5 

16 

Ability Score Improvement 

6 

14 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

— 

17th 

+6 

17 

Metamagic 

6 

15 

4 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

18th 

+6 

18 

Sorcerous Origin feature 

6 

15 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

19th 

+6 

19 

Ability Score Improvement 

6 

15 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

20th 

+6 

20 

Sorcerous Restoration 

6 

15 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

2 

1 

1 



Sorcerers often 
have obscure or quixotic 
motivations driving them 
to adventure. Some seek a greater 
understanding of the magical force that infuses 
them, or the answer to the mystery of its origin. Others 
hope to find a way to get rid of it, or to unleash its full 
potential. Whatever their goals, sorcerers are every bit 
as useful to an adventuring party as wizards, making 
up for a comparative lack of breadth in their magical 
knowledge with enormous flexibility in using the 
spells they know. 

Creating a Sorcerer 


links you to a powerful individual in the world—the fey 
creature that blessed you at birth, the dragon who put 
a drop of its blood into your veins, the lich who created 
you as an experiment, or the deity who chose you to 
carry this power. 

Quick Build 

You can make a sorcerer quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, Charisma should be your highest 
ability score, followed by Constitution. Second, 
choose the hermit background. Third, choose the 

prestidigitation, ray of frost, and shocking grasp 
cantrips, along with the Ist-level spells shield and 
magic missile. 


The most important question to consider when creating 
your sorcerer is the origin of your power. As a starting 
character, you'll choose an origin that ties to a draconic 
bloodline or the influence of wild magic, but the exact 
source of your power is up to you to decide. Is it a family 
curse, passed down to you from distant ancestors? Or 
did some extraordinary event leave you blessed with 
inherent magic but perhaps scarred as well? 

How do you feel about the magical power coursing 
through you? Do you embrace it, try to master it, or 
revel in its unpredictable nature? Is it a blessing or 
a curse? Did you seek it out, or did it find you? Did 
you have the option to refuse it, and do you wish you 
had? What do you intend to do with it? Perhaps you 
feel like you’ve been given this power for some lofty 
purpose. Or you might decide that the power gives you 
the right to do what you want, to take what you want 
from those who lack such power. Perhaps your power 


Class Features 

As a sorcerer, you gain the following class features. 

Hit Points 

Hit Dice: ld6 per sorcerer level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 6 + your Constitution modifier 
Hit Points at Higher Levels: ld6 (or 4) + your 
Constitution modifier per sorcerer level after 1st 

Proficiencies 

Armor: None 

Weapons: Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs, 
light crossbows 
Tools: None 

Saving Throws: Constitution, Charisma 
Skills: Choose two from Arcana, Deception, Insight, 
Intimidation, Persuasion, and Religion 






































Equipment 

You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 

• (a) a light crossbow and 20 bolts or (h) any simple 
weapon 

• (a) a component pouch or (b) an arcane focus 

• (a) a dungeoneer’s pack or (b) an explorer’s pack 

• Two daggers 

Spellcasting 

An event in your past, or in the life of a parent or 
ancestor, left an indelible mark on you, infusing you with 
arcane magic. This font of magic, whatever its origin, 
fuels your spells. See chapter 10 for the general rules of 
spellcasting and chapter 11 for the sorcerer spell list. 

Cantrips 

At 1st level, you know four cantrips of your choice from 
the sorcerer spell list. You learn additional sorcerer 
cantrips of your choice at higher levels, as shown in the 
Cantrips Known column of the Sorcerer table. 

Spell Slots 

The Sorcerer table shows how many spell slots you 
have to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast 
one of these sorcerer spells, you must expend a slot of 
the spell’s level or higher. You regain all expended spell 
slots when you finish a long rest. 

For example, if you know the Ist-level spell burning 
hands and have a Ist-level and a 2nd-level spell slot 
available, you can cast burning hands using either slot. 

Spells Known of 1st Level and Higher 

You know two Ist-level spells of your choice from the 
sorcerer spell list. 

The Spells Known column of the Sorcerer table 
shows when you learn more sorcerer spells of your 
choice. Each of these spells must be of a level for which 
you have spell slots. For instance, when you reach 3rd 
level in this class, you can learn one new spell of 1st 
or 2nd level. 

Additionally, when you gain a level in this class, 
you can choose one of the sorcerer spells you know 
and replace it with another spell from the sorcerer 
spell list, which also must be of a level for which you 
have spell slots. 

Spellcasting Ability 

Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your sorcerer 
spells, since the power of your magic relies on your 
ability to project your will into the world. You use your 
Charisma whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting 
ability. In addition, you use your Charisma modifier 
when setting the saving throw DC for a sorcerer spell 
you cast and when making an attack roll with one. 

Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus -f 
your Charisma modifier 

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + 
your Charisma modifier 


Spellcasting Focus 

You can use an arcane focus (found in chapter 5) as a 
spellcasting focus for your sorcerer spells. 

SoRCEROus Origin 

Choose a sorcerous origin, which describes the 
source of your innate magical power: Draconic 
Bloodline or Wild Magic, both detailed at the end of the 
class description. 

Your choice grants you features when you choose it at 
1st level and again at 6th, 14th, and 18th level. 

Font of Magic 

At 2nd level, you tap into a deep wellspring of magic 
within yourself. This wellspring is represented by 
sorcery points, which allow you to create a variety of 
magical effects. 

Sorcery Points 

You have 2 sorcery points, and you gain more as you 
reach higher levels, as shown in the Sorcery Points 
column of the Sorcerer table. You can never have 
more sorcery points than shown on the table for your 
level. You regain all spent sorcery points when you 
finish a long rest. 

Flexible Casting 

You can use your sorcery points to gain additional spell 
slots, or sacrifice spell slots to gain additional sorcery 
points. You learn other ways to use your sorcery points 
as you reach higher levels. 

Creating Spell Slots. You can transform unexpended 
sorcery points into one spell slot as a bonus action on 
your turn. The Creating Spell Slots table shows the cost 
of creating a spell slot of a given level. You can create 
spell slots no higher in level than 5th. 

Creating Spell Slots 

Spell Slot Sorcery 

Level Point Cost 
1st 2 

2nd 3 

3rd 5 

4th 6 

5th 7 

Converting a Spell Slot to Sorcery Points. As a 

bonus action on your turn, you can expend one spell 
slot and gain a number of sorcery points equal to the 
slot’s level. 

Metamagic 

At 3rd level, you gain the ability to twist your spells 
to suit your needs. You gain two of the following 
Metamagic options of your choice. You gain another one 
at 10th and 17th level. 

You can use only one Metamagic option on a spell 
when you cast it, unless otherwise noted. 




Careful Spell 

When you cast a spell that forces other creatures to make 
a saving throw, you can protect some of those creatures 
from the spell’s full force. To do so, you spend 1 sorcery 
point and choose a number of those creatures up to your 
Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature). A chosen 
creature automatically succeeds on its saving throw 
against the spell. 

Distant Spell 

When you cast a spell that has a range of 5 feet or 
greater, you can spend 1 sorcery point to double the 
range of the spell. 

When you cast a spell that has a range of touch, you 
can spend 1 sorcery point to make the range of the 
spell 30 feet. 

Empowered Spell 

When you roll damage for a spell, you can spend 1 
sorcery point to reroll a number of the damage dice up 
to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one). You must 
use the new rolls. 

You can use Empowered Spell even if you have 
already used a different Metamagic option during the 
casting of the spell. 

Extended Spell 

When you cast a spell that has a duration of 1 minute 
or longer, you can spend 1 sorcery point to double its 
duration, to a maximum duration of 24 hours. 

Heightened Spell 

When you cast a spell that forces a creature to make a 
saving throw to resist its effects, you can spend 3 sorcery 
points to give one target of the spell disadvantage on its 
first saving throw made against the spell. 

Quickened Spell 

When you cast a spell that has a casting time of 1 action, 
you can spend 2 sorcery points to change the casting 
time to 1 bonus action for this casting. 

Subtle Spell 

When you cast a spell, you can spend 1 sorcery point to 
cast it without any somatic or verbal components. 

Twinned Spell 

When you cast a spell that targets only one creature and 
doesn’t have a range of self, you can spend a number of 
sorcery points equal to the spell’s level to target a second 
creature in range with the same spell (1 sorcery point if 
the spell is a cantrip). 

Ability Score Improvement 

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, 
and 19th level, you can increase one ability score of your 
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of 
your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase an ability 
score above 20 using this feature. 


SoRGERous Restoration 

At 20th level, you regain 4 expended sorcery points 
whenever you finish a short rest. 

SoRCEROus Origins 

Different sorcerers claim different origins for their 
innate magic. Although many variations exist, most 
of these origins fall into two categories: a draconic 
bloodline and wild magic. 

Draconic Bloodline 

Your innate magic comes from draconic magic that was 
mingled with your blood or that of your ancestors. Most 
often, sorcerers with this origin trace their descent 
back to a mighty sorcerer of ancient times who made a 
bargain with a dragon or who might even have claimed 
a dragon parent. Some of these bloodlines are well 
established in the world, but most are obscure. Any 
given sorcerer could be the first of a new bloodline, as a 
result of a pact or some other exceptional circumstance. 

Dragon Ancestor 

At 1st level, you choose one type of dragon as your 
ancestor. The damage type associated with each dragon 
is used by features you gain later. 


Draconic Ancestry 


Dragon 

Damage Type 

Black 

Acid 

Blue 

Lightning 

Brass 

Fire 

Bronze 

Lightning 

Copper 

Acid 

Cold 

Fire 

Green 

Poison 

Red 

Fire 

Silver 

Cold 

White 

Cold 


You can speak, read, and write Draconic. Additionally, 
whenever you make a Charisma check when interacting 
with dragons, your proficiency bonus is doubled if it 
applies to the check. 

Draconic Resilience 

As magic flows through your body, it causes physical 
traits of your dragon ancestors to emerge. At 1st level, 
your hit point maximum increases by 1 and increases by 
1 again whenever you gain a level in this class. 

Additionally, parts of your skin are covered by a thin 
sheen of dragon-like scales. When you aren’t wearing 
armor, your AC equals 13 +your Dexterity modifier. 

Elemental Affinity 

Starting at 6th level, when you cast a spell that deals 
damage of the type associated with your draconic 
ancestry, add your Charisma modifier to that damage. 

At the same time, you can spend 1 sorcery point to gain 
resistance to that damage type for 1 hour. 








Dragon Wings 

At 14th level, you gain the ability to sprout a pair of 
dragon wings from your back, gaining a flying speed 
equal to your current speed. You can create these wings 
as a bonus action on your turn. They last until you 
dismiss them as a bonus action on your turn. 

You can’t manifest your wings while wearing armor 
unless the armor is made to accommodate them, and 
clothing not made to accommodate your wings might 
be destroyed when you manifest them. 

Draconic Presence 

Beginning at 18th level, you can channel the dread 
presence of your dragon ancestor, causing those around 
you to become awestruck or frightened. As an action, 
you can spend 5 sorcery points to draw on this power 
and exude an aura of awe or fear (your choice) to a 
distance of 60 feet. For 1 minute or until you lose your 
concentration (as if you were casting a concentration 
spell), each hostile creature that starts its turn in this 
aura must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be 
charmed (if you chose awe) or frightened (if you chose 
fear) until the aura ends. A creature that succeeds on 
this saving throw is immune to your aura for 24 hours. 

Wild Magic 

Your innate magic comes from the wild forces of chaos 
that underlie the order of creation. You might have 
endured exposure to some form of raw magic, perhaps 
through a planar portal leading to Limbo, the Elemental 
Planes, or the mysterious Far Realm. Perhaps you 
were blessed by a powerful fey creature or marked by a 
demon. Or your magic could be a fluke of your birth, with 
no apparent cause or reason. However it came to be, this 
chaotic magic churns within you, waiting for any outlet. 

Wild Magic Surge 

Starting when you choose this origin at 1st level, your 
spellcasting can unleash surges of untamed magic. 
Immediately after you cast a sorcerer spell of 1st level 
or higher, the DM can have you roll a d20. If you roll a 
1, roll on the Wild Magic Surge table to create a random 
magical effect. 

Tides of Chaos 

Starting at 1st level, you can manipulate the forces of 
chance and chaos to gain advantage on one attack roll, 
ability check, or saving throw. Once you do so, you must 
finish a long rest before you can use this feature again. 

Any time before you regain the use of this feature, the 
DM can have you roll on the Wild Magic Surge table 
immediately after you cast a sorcerer spell of 1st level or 
higher. You then regain the use of this feature. 

Bend Luck 

Starting at 6th level, you have the ability to twist fate 
using your wild magic. When another creature you can 
see makes an attack roll, an ability check, or a saving 
throw, you can use your reaction and spend 2 sorcery 
points to roll ld4 and apply the number rolled as a 
bonus or penalty (your choice) to the creature’s roll. You 


can do so after the creature rolls but before any effects 
of the roll occur. 

Controlled Chaos 

At 14th level, you gain a modicum of control over the 
surges of your 